 
ODISHA LEAVE RULES
INTRODUCTION
A.
Leave —
Leave means permitted absence from duty. It is necessary to know
the following provisions of law in order to acquire.a quick grasp in respect
of the provisions of the leave
(a ) Odisha Leave Rules, 1966 (Appendix-10) of Odisha Service Code)
(b) Chapter-VI of the Odisha Service Code.
(c) Leave Procedure Rules (Appendix-13 of Odisha Service Code).
(d) Grant of casual leave etc. (Appendix-6 of Odisha Service Code).
(e) Powers delegated in respect of sanction of leave (Appendix-1 of
Odisha Service Code),; and
(f) Government instructions issued from time to time.
Salient Points
1. Leave cannot be claimed as a matter of right. (Rule 131, OSC)
2. Leave sanctioning authority may refuse or revoke leave of any
(Rule 131, OSC)
kind.
3. Leave may not be granted to a Govt. servant under Suspension
(Rule 132, OSC)
4. Leave shall be earned by duty only.
(Rule 133, OSC)
5. Leave begins on the day. on which transfer of charge is effected
and ends of the day on which charge is resumed.
(Rule 137, OSC)
6. Holiday can be- prefixed to leave.
(Rule 137, OSC)
7. When a Government servant avails of joining time in continuation
of leave his leave ends on the date before such period of joining time
commences. (Rule 137 (b),OSC)
8. Holiday can be prefixed and/or suffixed to leave.
(Rule 137 (c) & (d), OSC)
9. A Government servant serving in a vacation department and
sessions judges may be permitted to combine vacation with leave either at
the beginning or at the end thereof. (Rule 140, OSC)
10. No Government servant who has been granted leave on medical
certificate may return to duty without first producing a medical certificate
of fitness in the form of prescribed in.

11. Unless a Government servant is permitted by the leave
sanctioning authority to do so a Government servant on leave may not
return to duty more than fourteen days before the expiry of the period of
leave granted to him
(Rule. 141, OSC)
12. All orders recalling a Govt. servant to duty before expiry of his
leave should state whether the return to duty is optional or compulsory.
Such cases are regulated under the provision of Rule 142 of OSC.
servant 13. No compulsorily leave shall retires. be be granted granted beyol beyond c the date on (Rule (Rule which 6 6 of a OLR, Govemnment 1966)
14. So far as AIS Officer serving the State Government are concemed
leave rules as amended to the AIS (Leave) Rules, 1955 as per notification
No. 11019/697, AIS (II)., Dt. 03.03:1998 and Dt. 09.03.1998 have
been made applicable.
(F. D. No. 29801/F., Dt. 13.07.1998)
The Odisha Leave Rules, 1966 came into force from 1st August,
1966. The provisions of Chapter-VI of Odisha Service Code as depicted
below are applicable to the persons who are governed by the Odisha Leave
Rules,1966
1.
General conditions of leave.
(Section 1, Rules 131 to 146)
2.
Leave to part time Govt. servants and Governments remunerated
by honoraria or daily wages.
(Section-VI, Rules 171 to 173)
3.
Leave to employees paid from Contingency Grant.
(Rule 175)
4.
Special disability leave.
(Section -VII, Rules 176 to 177)
5.
Study leave and study allowance.
(Rules 179 to 193)
6.
Maternity leave
(Rule 194)
7.
Hospital leave.
(Rule 195)
8.
ick leave to Sea-men, etc.
(Rules 196 to 197)
B.
arious Kinds of Leave and the rules thereof
1. Earned Leave - "Earned Leave" means leave eared in respect
of periods spent on duty. The earned leave (E.L.) was being calculated at
the rate of 1/11th of the period spent on duty by a Government servant
till 31.12.1975. The system of half yearly leave account was introduced
from 1st January, 1976. The government servant's leave account will be
credifed with 15 days of E.L. on the lst of January and 15 days of E.L.
on the 1st. of July every year. In case of the years (ending with even
numbers such as 2, 4, 6, 8 and 0), 16 days will be credited on the 1st of
July every such year. The leave at the credit of the incumbent at the close
of the previous half year will be carried forward to the next half year
subject to the condition that the condition that the carried forward leave
plus the leave credited for the particular half year, should not exceed 180
days. The above rule was applicable tll 30.6.1986 and thereafter the number of days was enhanced to 240 days: As per OM No. 7351/F..
Dt 19.2.03 the number of days has been further enhanced to 300 days. If
a Government servant is appointed during the middle of the half year, the
leave account is entitled to be credited at the rate of the' 21/2 days for each
completed calendar month of the service which he is likely to render in the
particular calendar half year. When a Government servant is retiring or
resigning during a half year, his leave account is entitled to be credited at
the rate of 21/2 days for completed month in the half year upto to the date
of retirement or resignation. In case of Government servants in service on
31.12.1975, the old leave accounts should be closed and the leave credited
till 31.12.1975 shali be carried forward to the new leave account. In
course of the calculation, fraction of a day will be rounded up to a nearest
day. The maximum period of earned leave schedule to be,granted in
favour of a Government servant at a time should not exceed 150 days. If a
Government servant avails any extraordinary leave during the previous half
year reduction from earned leave account will be allowed. The advance
credit of earned leave of 15 days is to be reflected in the leave account on
1st January/1st July and it should be reduced by 1/10th of the period of
extraordinary leave availed of by a Government servant during the previous
half year subject to a maximum limit of 15 days.
If the E.L. at credit on 1st. January/1st. July is 300 days or less but
exceeds 225 days, advance credit is to be treated in a separate manner:
The advance credit of 15 days will be reflected in the leave account showing
in bracket the balance in excess of 300 days. Leave taken during the
current half year will be adjusted first against the figures shown in bracket.
2. Additional Earned Leave - The employees of Odisha Guest
Houses/Utkal Bhavan/Odisha Bhavan and Police Men including Fire Service
staff and Jail employees are eligible to avail additional earned leave as a
compensatory measure for their work on Sundays/ Second Saturdays/Public
holidays. In every year they are entitled to avail additional earned leave for
a period of 15 days in addition to the normal admissible earned leave. The
aforesaid additional earned leave may be surrendered in lieu of salary, and
allowances each year in full.
3. Half Pay Leave - "Half pay leave" means leave earned in
respect of completed years of service as provided in Rule 9 of the Odisha
Leave Rules, 1966. Half pay leave account of an employee is generally
credited with 20 days for every completed years of service inclusive of
periods of leave of all kinds, It is granted either on Medical Certificate or
on private affairs. It is also granted to a temporary employee provided the
sanctioning_authority has reason to believe that the employee concerned
will certainly return to his duty on its expiry : There is no restriction on an
officer at his option for being granted with half pay leave even if earned
leave is due.to him.
7. Leave not due - "Leave not due" is granted to a permanent
Government servant who has got no half pay leave at his credit. The
period of leave not due" should not exceed 360 days during the entire
service period of the employee. It is granted on production of Medical
Certificate. It is granted for a period of 90 days, at a time and 180 days in
the entire service period without medical certificate. The amount of leave
is to be limited to the "half pay leave" that the employee is likely to earn
subsequently. It is debited against the half pay leave which the employee
may earn subsequently on, return to duty as provided under Rule 10 of the
Odisha Leave Rules, 1966
8. Casual Leave - 1. These rules shall apply to all Government
servants including the work-charged employees other than casual laborers
whose conditions of service the Governor of Odisha is competent to
determine.
2. (a) Casual leave is admissible to a Government servant up to ten
days in a calendar year. In special circumstances, a Government servant
may be granted special casual leave to the extent of five days a year in
addition to the normal casual leave of ten days.
(b) Persons entering service in the middle or latter part of a year or
whose term of appointment does not extend a full calendar year shall not
be entitled-to the full amount of casual leave and special casual leave as in
case of other Government servants. The amount of leave to be sanctioned
in these cases shall.be proportionate to the period of employment during
the calendar year of the Govt. servant concerned . The sanctioning authority
may, at his discretion, allow a part of the full amount of casual leave and
special casual leave to an employee even in the earlier part of his appointment
if he fulfils other conditions required for grant of such leave
3. (a) Casual leave is not intended ordinarily for a rest or change, as
for those purposes other kinds of leave should be taken, but is meant to
meet emergencies. Instances of such emergencies are temporary
indisposition, the illness or death of near relatives, the performance of
religious rites, the obtaining of medical advice or assistance, the meeting,
escorting, or seeing off of wife or children at a port or distant railway
station, the adjustment of urgent family or business affairs and the like.
(b) Technically, a Government servant on casual leave is not treated
as absent from duty, and his pay is not intermitted. The officer granting
the leave and the officer taking it will be held responsible, if the public
service suffers in any way, for the absence of the officer on casual leave.
4. The grant of casual including special casual leave is subject to the
(i) Casual leave cannot be claimed as of right. The authorities competent
following conditions
to sanction casual leave may not grant it when it is not actuallynecessary or when its grant would be opposed to the interest of the
ODISHA LEAVERTE
public service. Casual leave should not be granted in cases in which
some other form of leave is appropriate. It shall not be granted So
as to cause an evasion of the rules regarding
(1) the date of reckoning pay and allowances;
(2) charge of office;
commencement and end of leave; and
(3)
retumn to duty or so as to extend the term of leave beyond the
(4)
Casual leave or casual leave combined with special casual leave shall
time admissible, by the rules
not be allowed for more than ten days at a time. It may be combined
()
with Sundays and other authorised holidays provided that the resulting
period of absence from duty does not exceed ten days.
(iti) Sundays or other authorised holidays when so combined with casual
leave or special casual leave shall not be counted for the purpose
of reckoning the total amount of casual leave including special
(iv) Casual leave shall not be granted on vague and general grounds as
casual leave.
for 'urgent affairs' or for 'certain ceremony.' The specific purpose
for which leave is required must be stated definitely.
( ) No Government servant may be allowed to proceed on casual leave
at short intervals.
(vi). All applications for casual 'leave on account of anticipated causes
shall uinder ordinary circumstances, be made at least three days
prior to the date from which casual leave is required. Absence in
anticipation of sanction shall not be condoned unless the necessity
for the leave could not have been foreseen. In such cases the nature
of sudden emergency must be definitely stated
This leave is admissible up to ten days in a calendar year. Under
special circumstances special casual leave of five days may be granted to
an incumbent in a calendar year. Casual leave in combination with special
casual leave may not be allowed for more than ten days at a time. This
leave is meant to meet the emergencies like illness, death of relatives,
performance of religious rites, etc. Under ordinary circumstances, application
for casual leave should be submitted three days prior to the date from
which casual leave is required, unless it is necessary for unforeseen reasons
i.e. sudden illness, vis major etc. The incumbent on casual leave is not
treated as an absentee from the duty. Casual leave which is not recognised
as a leave under the leave rules, cannot be combined with any other kind oz
leave as admissible under the leave rules.
9. Half-day Casual Leave - The State Governrent have had
under consideration for sometime past the need for introduction of a provision for grant of half day's casuial leave in view of the fact that on
certain occasions a Government servant may have some urgent private
work either in the forenoon or in the after- noon session of the office
hours, which does not require a full day's casual leave.
V After careful consideration, Government have been pleased to
decide that half day's casual leave may be allowed to a Government servant
if applied for to attend to any urgent private work under the same terms
and conditions as envisaged in Rule 4 of Appendix-6 to the Odisha Service
Code for grant of casual leave including special casual leave. For grant of
half day's casual leave, the lunch-break is to be treated as the dividing line
i. a Govt. servant who takes half day's casual leave for the fore-noon
session is required to come to the office at 2.00 P.M. Similarly if a Govt.
servant take half day's casual leave for the after-noon session, he may .be
allowed to leave office at 1.30 P.M. Half day's casual leave may be granted
in conduction with full day's casual leave subject to the maximum limit
prescribed under Rule 2 (a) of Appendix- 6.to the Odisha Service Code
3. These orders will take effect from 1st August 1994
4. Necessary amendment to the relevant rules of the Odisha Service
Code will be made separately. (F.D. No. 25168/F., Dtd. 15th July, 1994)
The half day casual leave is made effective from the 1st August
1994 with a view to grant half day C.L., the lunch break is the dividing
line i.e.-
(i) Govemment servant taking half days C.L. for the forenoon session
has to come to office at 2.00 P.M.
(ii)
Government servants taking half days C.L. for the afternoon session
may leave office at 1.30 P.M
Half days casual leave is meant for urgent private work which does
not require a full day's C.L. It may be granted in conjunction with
full one day's casual leave. It is subjected to the maximum limit as
prescribed for casual leave.
10. Quarantine Leave - Quarantine leave is leave of absence
from duty necessitated by orders not to attend office in consequence of
the presence of infectious disease in the family or household of a Government
servant. Such leave may be granted by the sanctioning authority prescribed
in rule 8 on the certificate of a Medical or Public Health Officer for a
period not exceeding 21 days, or in exceptional circumstances, 30 days,
Any leave necessary for quarantine purposes in excess of this period shall
be treated as ordinary leave, where admissible. Quarantine leave may also
be granted when necessary in continuation of other leave subject to the
above maximum. A Government servant on quarantine leave is not treated
as absent from duty and his pay is not intermitted.
Explanation: The term 'Medical or Public Health Officer occurring in this rule includes Medical Officer-in-charge of Military) or Municipal Hospital or Dispensary, or any other medical institution recognised by Government at the place of duty or residence of any Government (Civil or sojourn of a Government servant and in the case of a Government servant at whose place of duty or residence or sojoum there is no Government or Municipal Hospital or Dispensary no other Medical Institution recognised by Government Includes the Medical Officer-in-charge of a Government of Municipal Hospital or Dispensary or other medical Institution recognised by Government situated nearest to his place of duty or residence or sojourns. as the case may be.

Note 1: Cholera, Small Pox, Plague, Diptheria, Typhus fever and Cerebrospinal meningitis may be considered as infectious diseases for the purpose of this rule. In the case of chicken pox quarantine leave should not be sanctioned unless the Health Officer responsible considers that because of doubt as to the true nature of the disease, for example small pox, there is reason for the grant of such leave.

Note 2: In the case of non-gazetted Government servants, the authority competent to fill up the post may appoint a substitute in place of an absentee on quarantine leave.

Note 3: Quarantine leave may be granted subject to the report of the Medical or Health Officer, only when the patient suffering from an infectious disease lives with the Government servant at the latter's place of duty. A Government servant going to see a sick relative who is suffering from an infectious disease at another station will not be entitled to quarantine leave. In such cases, the Government servant may be granted ordinary leave as may be due to him.

Note: Govt. of India decided to abolish Quarantine leave from 23rd June, 1987.

6. Every officer who proposes to leave the station during casual or vacation leave or leave of absence during gazetted holidays, should state in his application the address or addresses, which will find him during such leave. No officer may go outside India on such leave without special permission of Govemment in the case of gazetted officers, or the sanctioning authority, in other cases.

7. Every authority which grants casual leave shall cause a register of such leave to be maintained showing the following particulars:

(i) name, rank of officer to whom casual leave has been granted;

(ii) date on which leave begins and ends;

(iii) period of leave sanctioned:

(iv) balance at credit;

(v) initials of the verifying officer.

The register should be regularly examined by the Inspecting Officers.

8. Administrative Departments of Government and Heads of Departments may, by order, prescribe the authorities competent to sanction casual leave, quarantine leave of absence during gazetted holidays or vacation in respect of their subordinate officers and staff. (Appendix 6 of OSC)

GOVERNMENT OF ODISHA'S INSTRUCTIONS

(1) Delegation of powers to the Heads of Departments to sanction casual leave, quarantine leave and leave of absence during gazetted holidays: The undersigned is directed to say that under rule 8 of Appendix 6 to the Orissa Service Code, the Heads of Departments are competent to delegate their powers to the Heads of Offices to sanction casual leave, quarantine leave and leave of absence during gazetted holidays in respect of gazetted and non-gazetted officers serving under them. They are, however, not competent to delegate such powers to the subordinate officers who are not Heads of Offices as a result of which avoidable references are being made to Heads of Departments for sanction of such leave. In the interest of expeditious disposal of Government business, Government have been pleased to decide that the Heads of Departments shall be competent to delegate the above powers to any subordinate officer of the appropriate status to sanction such leave in the cases of officers subordinate to him. (F.D. No. 5756/F., Dt. 20.02.1963)

(2) Admissibility of quarantine leave when the patient is not residing at the Headquarters of the Government servant: A case has been reported to Government in which an officer left his headquarters on casual leave to see his sick child who was living with his family in another station. He found that the child was suffering from one of the infectious diseases mentioned in Note 1 under paragraph (1) (b) of Appendix 6 to the Orissa Service Code for which quarantine leave is admissible. He remained absent from duty and submitted an application for quarantine leave.

Government have carefully considered the question of admissibility of quarantine leave in such cases and have decided that, subject to the report of Medical Officer or Health Officer, quarantine leave may be granted only when the patient suffering from an Infectious disease lives with the Government servant at the latter's place of duty. A Government servant going to see a sick relative at another station stays there, not because of the quarantine but because of the simple necessity and obligation for attending the patient. In such cases, quarantine leave will not be admissible but the Government servant may take ordinary leave as may be due to him.

(F.D. No. 2084/F., Dt. 17.03.1948)

(3) Treatment of absence of a Government servant attending (3)1) a non-official cultural conference: A question having arisen as to how the period of absence of a Government servant attending a non- official cultural conference will be treated, it has been decided that when a Government servant is permitted to attend the meeting of a non-official cultural conference at his own cost or at the cost of the University of any other non-official organisation, as an invite member of delegate or to read a paper submitted by him at such conference, he may be treated as on special casual leave which may be granted to the extent required for attendance at the meeting and for journeys to and from the place of meeting. The grant of this special casual leave is subject to the condition that it should not be allowed more than once during a calendar year unless justified by special circumstances. The special casual leave of 5 days in addition to the normal casual leave of 10 days prescribed in rule 2 of Appendix 6 of the Orissa Service Code, as amended by Notification No. 14384/F.. dated the 11th August, 1953 will not be admissible to the officers availing of a special casual leave under the concession in this memorandum. (F.D. No. 15497/F., Dt. 23.06.1955)

11. Maternity Leave This leave is granted for a maximum period of 90 days to a female employee in combination with any other leave due. A period of 60 days is granted in case to abortion including miscarriage. The application for such leave is to be filed with a certificate from an authorised medical practitioner. But in case of miscarriage/abortion, the certificate from a private registered medical practitioner may be accepted. The female Government servant is also entitled for the maternity leave for third time for subsequent issues provided that she is having less than two surviving children. This leave also counts for increment and pension. It is not debited in the leave account. The leave salary on this count will be equal to the pay drawn at the time of taking such leave.

MATERNITY LEAVE AMENDMENT - 2011

Consequent upon the recommendations of Sixth Central Pay Commission relating to maternity leave of a Government employe and the relevant Office Memorandum No. 13018/2/2008, Dtd. 11.9.2008 in the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension (DOPT], Government of India, the State Govternment after careful consideration have been pleased to decide that the existing limit of 90 days as per the provisions of Rule 194 of the Odisha Service Code will be modified as follows:

(i) The existing ceiling of 90 days maternity leave provided under sub-rule (b) of Rule 194 of Odisha Service Code is enhanced to 180 days.

(ii)

This shall take effect from 1st December, 2011.

(iii)
In view of paragraph (ii) above, a women employee in whose case the period of 90 days of maternity leave has not expired on the aforesaid date shall be entitled to the modified maternity leave of 180 days. (m)

Necessary amendments to the relevant provisions of Odisha Service Code will be made to the above extent in due course.

(Ο.Μ. Νο. 51856/F., Dt. 07.12.2011)

Absence form duty on Maternity ground by Female Contractual Employees engaged in different Departments of Government:

All Female employees engaged in Government Establishment on Contract basis with consolidated remuneration and having less than two surviving children are be eligible to get full consolidated remuneration for a period not exceeding 90 (ninety) days of her absence form duty on maternity ground in terms of Finance Deptt. Circular No. 39847/F., Dt. 01.10.2007 on certain conditions outlined therein.

Govt. have enhanced the ceiling of 90 (ninety) days of maternity leave provided under sub-rule (b) of Rule 194 of Orissa Service Code to 180 days in FDOM No. 51856/F., Dt. 07.12.2011 in respect of State Govt. employees.

After careful consideration Govt. have been pleased to decide that in respect of all female employees engaged in Government establishment on contract basis with consolidated remuneration the existing ceiling of 90 days of absence from duty on maternity ground is enhanced to 180 days subject to condition that the tenure of maternity leave will be within the contractual period in maximum.

All other conditions outlined in FD Circular No. 39847/F.,

Dt. 01.10.2007 will remain unchanged.

This shall be effect from 1st April, 2012. (F.D. No. 12383(225)/F., Dt. 31.03.2012)

Entitlement of Contractual appointees to Casual Leave:

Persons engaged on contractual basis and guided by FDOM No. 40545/F., Dt. 29.08.2009 are extended with the following benefits:

(i) Contractual employees shall be eligible (subject to exigencies of public service) for special leave of 10 days at the maximum during the period of engagement for one year. The leave will not be carried over to the next year and will lapse on completion of each year of service.

(ii) Unauthorised absence for a continuous period of 15 days or more will automatically terminate his/her engagement.

(ii) Female contractual employees, who are married and have less than two surviving children, would be eligible to get the benefit of "absence from duty" on maternity ground in terms of Finance Department Circular No. 12383/F., Dt. 31.03.2012.

2. It is, however, clarified that persons engaged through outsourcing shall be guided by the terms and conditions in the agreement between the employer and the service provider. (FDOM No. 23689/F., Dt. 23.06.2012)

Admissibility of child adoption leave to female Govt. employees :

Maternity leave of a female Government employee has been enhanced to 180 days by the State Government vide Finance Department OM No.. 51856/F., Dt. 07.12.2011 following recommendations of Sixth Central Pay Commission.

2. Govt. or India vide DOPT OM No. 13018/4/89-Estt.. Dt. 25.10.1989 have made provision for grant of leave to female Govt. servants on adoption of the child upto one year of age on the lines of maternity leave admissible natural mothers. Presently, the benefit has been enhanced to 180 days vide OM No. 13018/1/2009, Dt. 22.07.2009 of DOPT.

3. Proposal and representations from different quarters have been received for grant of child adoption leave to State Government employees to enable adoptive parents to avail leave similar to maternity leave.

4. Govt. after careful consideration have bene pleased to decide that female Govt. employees shall be entitled for adoption leave for proper care of adoptee for a period of 180 days subject to following conditions:

(i) The child adoption leave shall be admissible to female Govt. employees for a period of 180 days, on adoption of a child upto one year of age in line with maternity leave as admissible to natural mothers.

(ti) The facility shall not be admissible to an adoptive mother already having two surviving children at the time of adoption.

(iii) Child adoption leave shall not be debited against the leave account.

(iv) During the period of child adoption leave, she shall be paid leave salary equal to the pay drawn immediately before proceeding on leave.

(v) The application for leave shall be supported by the legal deed of adoption and the certificate of birth from the competent authority.

(vi) Child adoption leave shall be granted by the authority empowered to grant ordinary leave Government servant concerned. Besides, Head of office is competent to grant maternity leave as enhanced from time to time to the female Government servant working his her administrative control. However, FDOM No. 12598/F., Dt 28.03.2011 will continue to guide sanction of other kinds of leave

5. This shall be effective from the date of issue.

(FDOM No. 31056/F., Dt. 18.11.2016

Admissibility of Child adoption leave to female contractual employee engaged in Government establishment:

As per Finance Department Circular No. 39847(225), Dt. 01.10.2007 read with FD Circular No. 12383(225), Dt. 31.03.2012 لله female employees engaged in Government establishment on contract basis with consolidated remuneration shall be eligible for maternity leave for a period of 180 days subject to condition that tenure of maternity leave will be within the contractual period in maximum.

2. After careful consideration Govt. have been pleased to extend the benefits of child adoption leave for a period of 180 days to all the female employees engaged in Govt. establishment on contract basis with consolidated remuneration at par with the regular female Govt. servants subject to following conditions.

(i) The child adoption leave shall be admissable to female contractual employees for a period or 180 days, on adoption of a child up to one year of age in line with maternity leave as admissible to regular female Government employees. The facility shall not be admissible to an adoptive mother already

(ii)

having two surviving children at the time of adoption. (iii) Child adoption leave shall not be debited against the leave account. (

iv) The application for leave shall be supported by the legal deed of adoption and the certificate of birth from the competent authority.

3. Contractual employees appointed against the sanctioned posts following due recruitment procedure and ORV Act in terms of G.A. Deptt. Resolution No. 4591/Gen, Dt. 15.02.2014, Resolution No. 26108/ Geen, Dt. 17.09.2013 and Resolution No. 1066/Gen, Dt. 16.01.2014 and in similar cases appointed on specific Govt. orders with concurrence of Finance Deptt. will be treated at par with regular employees. The aforesaid categories of female contractual employees will be entitled to avail child adoption leave upto 180 days as extended to the regular female Govt. servants irrespective of their contractual period and there will be no interruption of service.

4. In case of female contractual employees appointed not against any sanctioned post and/or without following recruitment procedure and/ or ORV Act. then her child adoption leave is limited to the contractual period in maximum. However persons engaged for purely temporary schemes and short term duration or less than a year will not be eligible for child adoption leave.

5. Female contractual employees engaged on outsourcing basis through service providing agencies are not entitled to avail child adoption leave as there is no employee and employer relationship between the employee and Government in such engagements.

6. This shall be effective from the date of issue.

(FDOM No. 31059/F., Dt. 18.11.2016) Entitlement of Earned Leave in case of Government servants serving in Departments other than vacation Departments:

Consequent upon suspension of encashment of surrender leave benefits the upper limit of credit and encashment of unutilized Earned leave of a Government servant at the time of retirement was enhanced from 240 days to 300 days in FDOM No. 45493/F, Dt. 27.09.2002. Accordingly, the maximum limit of accumulation of Earned Leave admissible to a Government servant was enhanced to 300 days w.e.f. 01.07.2002 in FDOM No. 7351/F., dated 19.02.2003.

2. In view of the aforesaid enhancement Government, after careful consideration have been pleased to decide that the procedure with regard to maintenance of Leave Account of a Government servant serving in a Department (other than vacation Department) laid down in FDOM No. 20584/F., Dt. 17.05.1995 may be resorted to in the cases where the Earned Leave at the credit of the Government servant on the last day of December or June is 300 days (instead of 240 days) or less but more than 285 days (instead of 225 days).

3. This instructions shall take effect from 1st July, 2002.

4. Necessary amendment of relevant provisions of Orissa Leave Rules, 1966 shall be made in due course separately. (FD No. 10450/F., Dt. 14.03.2011)

Enforcement of bond executed by Government employees (while proceeding on leave for undertaking higher study/training inside and outside state) - Relaxation in specific cases:

1. In pursuance of Finance Department Memo No. 6874, Dt. 20.12.1996, Govt. employees are executing bond to ensure their continued employment in State Govt. for a period of five years bond period on completion of study leave/training.

2. The bond amount is calculated on the basis of prescribed formula as mentioned in the aforesaid Memo. In case, a Govt. servant after availing study leave/training does not return to duty or does not complete the prescribed period of five years in service after training he is liable to refund the bond amount along with interest thereon.

3. While operating above provisions, hardships has been faced by U the Government servant especially when they secured Job opportunity in Govt. of India/State PSUs/State Autonomous bodies/Universities with Substantial State Govt. funding before completing mandatory bond period.

4. Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs vide OM No. 70/10/60-Estt. (A), Dt. 09.05.1960 and OM No. F.5/10/66-Est. (C), Dt. 15.04.1966 have decided that the terms of the bond may not be enforced in case of Government servants who leave Government service before completion of the bond period to secure employment under a State Government, a Public Sector Undertaking owned wholly or partly by the Central Government or by a State Government or under quasi-Govt. organization and a fresh bond should be taken from such Govt. servant to ensure that they serve the new employer for the remainder period.

5. Considering the above provisions made by the Central Government the State Government, after careful consideration, have been pleased to decide that the terms of the bond shall not be enforced if the State Government servants, who prosecuted higher study availing study leave/ training, secure a job in Government of India/State Public Sector Undertakings/State Autonomous Bodies/Universities with Substantial State Govt. Funding before completion of the compulsory bond period:

Provided that they have to execute a fresh bond with the State Government for serving in the Government of India/State Public Sector Undertakings/State Autonomous Bodies/Universities with substantial State Government Funding for the remaining period of the original bond.

6. In case, the said Government servant fails to serve for the remaining period under the new employer, the entire amount prescribed in the original bond along with the interest thereon shall be refunded by such Government servant to the State Government. The new establishment will be requested to inform the concerned Administrative Department of the State Government regarding completion of the remainder period of the bond.

7. The above relaxation will not be applicable to the doctors serving under the State Govt. in allopathy stream.

8. There are two types of Government servants, viz. permanent et and temporary, to execute such bonds and therefore two types of bond are required to be executed. In case of permanent Government servant no surety is required; Whereas in case of temporary Government servant two sureties are required.

9. Two sets of model bonds forms (copies enclosed), one for permanent and other for temporary Government servants have been prescribed for execution by the Officer before they are relieved to join their new assignment under Government of India/State Public Sector Undertakings/State Autonomous bodies/Universities with substantial State Government Funding.

10. The conditions of the original bond shall be applicable mutatis mutandis to the fresh bond.

11. This shall come into force with effect from the date of issue. (FDOM No. 8518/F., Dt. 30.03.2017)

BOND FOR A TEMPORARY GOVERNMENT SERVANT WHO, AFTER RETURNING FROM STUDY LEAVE/TRAINING, SECURE A JOB IN GOVERNMENT OF INDIA/STATE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS/STATE AUTONOMOUS BODIES UNIVERSITIES WITH SUBSTANTIAL STATE GOVERNMENT FUNDING BEFORE COMPLETION OF THE BOND PERIOD KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS THAT WE resident of as in the district of in the Office/ Deptt. of "the principal obligor") and Shri/Smt daughter of at present employed as resident of at present employed (hereinafter called in the district of in the office/Deptt. of called "the 1st Surety") and Shri/Smt of resident of at present employed as in the district of son/ (hereafter son/daughter ("hereinafter called the 2nd Surety") do hereby jointly and severally bind ourselves and our heirs, executors, administrators and legal representative to act in accordance with the following conditions namely -

WHEREAS the principal obligor Sri/Smt. after retuming for the study leave/training has served the state Government for a period of the bond period of (years/months/days) only against years (as per the terms and conditions of the Bond executed by him/her on AND WHEREAS the principal obligor has been selected for the post of under .... (Govt. of India/State Public Sector undertaking/State Autonomous Bodies/Universities with substantial Government Funding) and shall be liable to serve the said establishment at least for the remainder period of per the stipulations of FDOM No. (years/months/days) as ./F, Dt.

NOW THEREFORE CONDITION OF THE ABOVE WRITTEN OBLIGATION is that in the event of the bounden Sri/Smt. failing to resume duty or resigning or retiring from service or remaining on unauthorised absence without obtaining previous sanction in writing from the new employer, the principal obligor and the sureties shall the forthwith refund to the Government of Odisha, hereinafter referred to as the Government as may be directed by the Government on demand all moneys paid to the principal obligor or expended/to be expended on account of pay and allowance, leave salary, cost of fees, travelling and other expenses, as the case may be, which amount for the purpose these presents shall be taken to be the sum of Rs. ...............(Rupees) on account of the principal obligor having been placed on study leave, higher study on leave granted as aforesaid together with the interest thereon from the date of demand at Govt. rates for the time being in force on Government loans.

AND UPON the principal obligor Sri/Smt Rand/or Sri/Smt .... and/or Sri/Smt. the sureties as aforesaid making such refund, in full force and virtue and it is agreed and declared by the principal obligor and the sureties that in the event of default without prejudice to other remedies that the Govt. may adopt, the Govt. shall be entitled to recover the aforesaid amounts from the principal obligor and the sureties jointly and severally as a public demand under the Odisha Public Demands Recovery Act, 1962:

PROVIDED that the liability of the sureties herein shall not be impaired or discharged by reason of time being granted by the Government or by any forbearance, act or omission on the part of the Government or any person authorised by them (wherever with or without the consent or knowledge of the sureties) nor shall be it necessary for the Govt. to sue the said principal obligor before suing the above bounden sureties) nor shall be it necessary for the Government to sue the said principal obligor before suing the above bounden sureties Sri/Smt. Smt. and Sri/ or any of them for the amount due herein.

IN WITNESSES to the above written bond and to all terms and conditions herein before contained we have signed hereunder this day of 20

Witness

(1)

(2)

In the presence of witness - (1)

(2)

Signed and delivered by the above principal obligor

Sri/Smt.

Signed and delivered by the 1st Surety above named Sri/Smt.

Signed and delivered by the 2nd Surety above named

ACCEPTED

For and on behalf of the Government of Odisha

BOND FOR A TEMPORARY GOVERNMENT SERVANT WHO, AFTER RETURNING FROM STUDY LEAVE/TRAINING, SECURE A JOB IN GOVERNMENT OF INDIA/STATE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS/STATE AUTONOMOUS WITH SUBSTANTIAL STATE GOVERNMENT FUNDING BEFORE COMPLETION OF THE BOND PERIOD BODIES/UNIVERSITIES

KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS THAT I resident of in the district of at present employed as the Office/Deptt. of (hereinafter called "the principal obligor") do hereby myself and my heirs, executors, administrators and legal representatives to act in accordance with by the following conditions namely - ..... in

WHEREAS the principal obligor Sri/Smt. returning for the study leave/training has served the state Government for a period of period of after (years/months/days) only against the bond years (as per the terms and conditions of the Bond executed by him/her on

AND WHEREAS the principal obligor has been selected for the post of undertaking/State Autonomous Bodies/Universities with substantial Government Funding) and shall be liable to serve the said establishment at least for the remainder period of as per the stipulations of FDOM No. (years/months/days) .../F, Dt.

NOW THEREFORE CONDITION OF THE ABOVE WRITTEN OBLIGATION is that in the event of the bounden obligor failing to resume duty or resigning or retiring from service or remaining on unauthorised absence without obtaining previous sanction in writing from the new employer, the obligor shall forthwith refund to the Government of Odisha, hereinafter referred to as the Government as may be directed by the Government on demand all moneys paid to the principal obligor or expended/to be expended on account of pay and allowance, leave salary, cost of fees, travelling and other expenses, as the case may be, which amount for the purpose these presents shall be taken to be the sum of Rs. ...............(Rupees .........) on account of the principal obligor having been placed on study leave, higher study on leave granted as aforesaid together with the interest thereon from the date of demand at Government rates for the time being in force on Government loans.

AND UPON the obligor as aforesaid making such refund, the above written obligation shall be void and no effect, otherwise it shall be and remain in full force by virtue-and it is agreed and declared by the obligor that in the event of default without prejudice to other remedies that the Government may adopt, the Govt. shall be entitled to recover the aforesaid amounts from the principal obligor as a public demand under the Odisha Public Demands Recovery Act, 1962:

IN WITNESSES to the written bond and to all terms and conditions herein before contained we have signed hereunder this.......... day of..........20..........

Signed and delivered by the obligor

In the presence of Witness-

(1)

(2)

ACCEPTED

For and on behalf of the Government of Odisha

Admissibility of Maternity Leave to female Govt. Servants and clarification thereof:

As per Rule-194 (c) of Odisha Service Code "leave salary during such leave shall be equal to the pay drawn by the Government servant concerned at the time of taking leave".

2. Representations have been received from various quarters regarding financial constraints faced by the female Government employees due to non-disbursement of their leave salary during the period of maternity leave as the sanction of leave is not made when the employee is allowed to proceed on maternity leave. The sanction of leave is made only on the joining of duty after availing leave. This leads to non-drawal of leave salary during the period the employee is on maternity leave.

3. It is, therefore, reiterated that the sanction of leave should invariably be made before the female Government employee proceeds on maternity leave. Further, leave salary as due should be drawn on sanction of leave.

No. 37478/F, Dt. 01.12.2018

(Tuhin Kanta Pandey)

Additional Chief Secretary to Government

PATERNITY LEAVE 2011

The AIS (Leave) Rules, 1955 as well as CCS (Leave) Rules provide for Paternity Leave to a male member of the service with less than two surviving children for a period of 15 days during the confinement of his wife for child birth. Keeping this in view, the State Govt. have been pleased to extend similar benefit to the employees of State Govt.

(i) A male member of the State Government service with less than two surving children can avail paternity leave for a period of 15 days during the confinement of his wife for child birth, i.e. upto 15 days or upto six months from the date of delivery of the child.

(ii) During such period of 15 days, he shall be paid leave salary equal to the pay drawn immediately before proceeding on leave.

(iii) The paternity leave may be combined with leave of any other kind.

(iv) The paternity leave shall not be debited against the leave account.

(v) If paternity leave is not availed of within the period as specified in para (1) above, such leae shall be treated as lapsed. Note: The paternity leave shall not normally be refused under any circumstances except in case of exigencies of service of the employee as decided by the Government from time to time. 2. Necessary insertions of the aforementioned provision under the relevant rules of Odisha Service Code shall be made in due course. ( O.M. No. 51861/F, Dt. 07.12.2011) 12. Special Disability Leave - The provisions for special disability leave has been enumerated under Rules 176 and 177 of the Odisha Service Code. This leave is granted to an employee when some disability is caused to him by injury inflicted or caused in or in consequence performance of of his official duties or caused in consequence of his official position. The manifestation of disability should come to the notice within three months of the incident. In special cases, the time limit of three months may be extended. This leave will be granted on production of certificate from an authorised medical attendant and the leave is limited to a maximum period of 24 months, it can be combined with the leave of any other kind. At the time of calculation of pension, this type of leave will be treated as duty. It can be granted more than once if the disability is aggravated or reproduced in similar circumstances at a later date. But the maximum period leave to be granted in consequence on any one disability in no case should exceed 24 months. If the injury is inflicted to the employee accidentally, special disability leave is admissible to him. The employee under this leave is entitled to get leave salary for the first four months which is equal to the leave salary of earned leave. For the remaining period he is entitled to get the salary equal to the leave salary as admissible during the half pay leave. He is also entitled to avail half pay leave simultaneously after expiry of four months of such special disability leave and get leave salary equal to full pay leave. In case the employee is entitled to any special benefit under the provisions of Workmen Compensation Act, the amount of leave salary will be reduced by the amount of benefit payable under the said Act.

13. Study Leave Generally study leave is not granted to subordinate staff. It is only granted to them in very exceptional cases. It is not ordinarily to be granted to Govemment servants of less than five years of service or Government servants within three years of service. When they have the option of retiring or if they have the option of retiring after 20 years of service, within three years of the date at which they will complete 25 years of service, the study leave should not exceed two years during the whole period of service nor shall the total period of study leave in combination with other kinds of leave except leave on medical certificate or extraordinary leave involving absence from duty for more than 28 months will be allowed. The maximum period of study leave admissible for doctors of Health and Welfare Department and staff of labour and employment department, is three years. The incumbent under study leave is entitled to draw half average pay. This type of leave counts for increment. The incumbent is to execute a bond prescribed for the purpose in case of study leave/higher study within the country. Study leave is not debited in the leave account.

14. Unutilised Leave The benefit unutilised leave is admissible to an incumbent in the following circumstances:

(a) When an employee retires on attaining the age of superannuation.

(b) When premature retirement is given to an employee.

(c) When an employee retires voluntarily.

(d) When an employee retires on invalidation.

(e) When an employee dies while in Government service, (to his family).

(f) When an employee resigns or quits from Government service.

15. Leave admissible to Adhoc Employees - The adhoc employees are entitled to casual leave as per Appendix-6 of the Odisha Service Code. If the appointment of the concerned employee is treated as adhoc, for purely technical reasons, such as Courts' injunction, etc., will be entitled to leave as admissible to temporary Government servants under the provisions of Odisha Leave Rules, 1966. If the adhoc appointments are for brief period, the earned leave at the rate of 21½ days per month of completed service will be admissible. While granting the leave, the same should be for full day and not a half day. They will also not be entitled to the benefit of encashment of earned leave on termination of their service. If the adhoc appointment continues beyond a period of three years, without any break, all kinds of leave as admissible to temporary government servants under the provisions of Odisha Leave Rules, 1966 from the date of their initial appointment, will be given to the concerned employee.

C. Study Allowance

A Government servant who has been granted with study leave or studies outsides India, is eligible to get study allowance. The rate of allowance for the above purpose differs from country to country. This allowance during the course of study for the entire period of vacation is allowed in specified circumstances. The period ear-marked for study allowance may not exceed 24 months in all. The study allowance will not be given to the incumbent during his study leave when he studies in India.

D. General Principles for Grant of Lea e-

1. As per Rule 131 of the Odisha Service Code, the leave cannot be claimed as a matter of right.
2. As provided under Rule 16 (b) of the Leave Procedure Rules. leave may be granted with retrospective effect from the date on which it is admissible..

3. As per Rule 72 of the Odisha Service Code, no Government servant shall be granted leave of any kind for a continuous period exceeding five years except with the sanction of Government.

4. As per Rule 131 of the Odisha Service Code, if the exigencies of public service so demands, discretion to refuse or revoke leave of any description is reserved to the authority empowered to grant it.

5. Any officer may opt for grant of half pay leave even when earned leave is due to him. It is, however, not open to the leave sanctioning authority to alter the kind of leave due and applied for except at the written request of the Government servant.

6. As per Rule 20 (b) of the leave procedure rules, a Govt. servant intending to leave his headquarters during the leave must obtain permission for the purpose and he has to furnish his leave address in the application.

7. As per Rule 72 (2) of Odisha Service Code, read with Rule 134 (4) of the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966, the wilful absence of an employee from duty after the expiry of the leave renders him liable for disciplinary action.

8. As per Rule 146 (1) of Odisha Service Code an official on leave should not take up any service or employment else- where without obtaining prior sanction of the competent authority.

9. As per Rule 140 of the Odisha Service Code, the Government

servant on medical leave may join after expiry of such leave only on

production of medical certificate of fitness.

10. Government servants are required to produce medical certificate from medical officer who is the authorised medical attendant under the Odisha Services (Medical Attendants) Rules.

11. A non-gazetted Government servant (other than Class IV) is required to produce medical certificate from a registered Medical Practitioner/Medical Officer of Government.

12. In case of a Class IV employee, the competent authority before granting leave is required to accept such certificate as it would deem sufficient.

13. If considered necessary, the leave sanctioning authority may ask for second medical opinion from the incumbent who continues on medical leave.

E. Penal Action -

(1) If the Government employee remains absent after the end of leave, he will not be entitled to leave salary for period of such absence.
(2) The period for remaining absent after the end of the leave, will be debited to half pay leave account as per Rule 144 of the Odisha Service Code.

(3) If a Government employee remains absent after the end of the leave, disciplinary action has to be taken against him.

(4) If the Govt. employee remains absent continuously for more than five years, he is to be removed from the service after following the procedure as laid down in OCS (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1962 unless Government takes a decision otherwise in view of exceptional circumstances.

F. Calculation of Unutilised Leave

For the purpose of encashment of unutilised leave, calculation is necessary. The number of days of eamed leave at the credit of the employee on the last day of his service subject to the maximum limit of 300 (Ο.Μ. No. 45439 dt. 27.9.02) to be taken into account in the following cases:

(a) retirement of an incumbent on attaining the age of superannuation.

(b) death of the incumbent while he is in service.

The number of days of earned leave plus the half pay leave at the credit of the incumbent on the last day of his service subject to the maximum limit of 180 days are to be taken into account in the following cases:

(a) Voluntary retirement,

(b) Retirement on invalidation, and

(c) Premature retirement (other than as a measure of punishment).

A Govt. servant who resigns or quits the service is entitled to encash in respect of earned leave to the extent of half of such leave at his credit subject to a maximum limit of 150 days. Leave salary in respect of the unutilised leave along with dearness allowance as appropriate to the salary is to be given to the incumbent. House rent allowance and compensatory allowances are not admissible. The leave encashment benefit is to be granted suo motu without waiting for any application from the concerned staff. The payment of whole or part of the case equivalent leave salary is to be withheld if, in the opinion of the sanctioning authority, there is a possibility of some money becoming irrecoverable from the employee on conclusion of any disciplinary/criminal proceeding against him or on regularisation of the period of his suspension during the service. On conclusion of the proceeding or regularisation of the period of suspension, such incumbent will be entitled to the amount so withheld after adjustment of relevant Govt. dues, if any.

G. Quantum of Leave Salary

(a) In case of earned leave, the leave salary will be equal to the pay drawn immediately before proceeding on earned leave.
(b) In case of extraordinary leave, no leave salary is admissible.

(c) In case of half pay leave, the leave salary equal to half the amount admissible while on earned leave can be drawn.

(d) In case of leave not due, the amount equal to leave salary as admissible during the period of half pay leave will be drawn.

(e) In case of commuted leave the leave salary equal to the amount admissible while on earned leave will be drawn.

Duties of Leave 
Sanctioning Authority - (1) Except as provided in this rule no leave may be granted to a Gazetted Government servant and the admissibility of leave has been obtained from the Accountant General Odisha. In the case of leave on average pay or earned leave, the authority competent to sanction leave may calculate the amount of such leave admissible to the officer in respect of the period of duty rendered by him from the date of retum from leave on the last occasion and issue provisional sanction to the leave admissił le to him without waiting for the report from the Accountant General. On necessary verification, will issue the leave salary slip in respect of the leave on average pay of earned leave due and for the rest of the period if any, request the administrative authority to modify the sanction if necessary. In either case, the Accountant General will report on the title to the leave immediately on receipt of the provisional sanction, besides issuing the leave salary slip. (b) Leave may be granted with retrospective effect from the date on which it is admissible.

(Rule 16 of the Leave Procedure Rules - Appendix 13 of OSC)

2. (i) No Government servant shall be granted leave of any kind for a continuous period exceeding five years.

(ii) Where a Govt. does not resume duty after remaining on leave for continuous period of five years, or where a Government servant after the expiry of his leave remains absent from duty otherwise than on foreign service or on account of suspension, for any period which together with the period of the leave granted to him exceeds five years, he shall, unless Government in view of the exceptional circumstances of the case otherwise determine, be removed from service after following the procedure laid down in the Odisha Civil Services (CCA) Rules, 1962. (Rule 72 of OSC)

3. A Government servant intending to leave his headquarters station during leave must obtain necessary prior permission of the authority competent to sanction leave except in emergencies and furnish to him the address which will find during leave.

(Rule 20 (b) of Leave Procedure Rules - Appendix 13 of OSC)

4. Where a Government servant who is not in permanent employ fails to resume duty on the expiry of the maximum period of extraordinary leave granted to him or where such Government servant who is granted a lesser amount of extraordinary leave than the maximum amount admissable. remains absent from duty for any period which together with the extraordinary leave granted exceeds the limit upto which he could haw been granted such leave under these rules, he shall unless the State Government in view of the exceptional circumstances of the case otherwise determine be removed from service after following the procedure laid down in Odisha Civil Services (CCA) Rules, 1962. (Rule 13(4) of the Odisha Leave Rules - Appendix 10 of OSC)

AMENDMENT OF ODISHA LEAVE RULES

(8) The ceiling of 240 days enhanced to 300 days for encashment of unutilised E.L.: The State Government have decided to enhance the existing upper limit of 240 days to 300 days or encashment of unutilised Earned Leave at the credit of an employee 'at the time of retirement. This additional limit would apply to all employees who retire on or after the 30th September, 2002. The enhanced ceiling will not be applicable in respect of employees who have retired earlier.

(F.D. No. 45439/F., Dt. 27.09.2002)

(8-A) Admissibility of Earned Leave: It has been decided by the Government in Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 45439/F., dated 27.09.2002 to enhance the upper limit of encashment of un-utilised Earned Leave from 240 days to 300 days w.e.f. 30.09.2002. In order to implement the above decision of Government, it is felt that the accumulation limit of Earned Leave of 240 days now admissible to a Government servant vide Para-4 (a) of Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 55423/F,, dated 14.11.1986, needs to be enhanced to 300 days.

2. After careful consideration, Government, in modification of Para 4 of F.D. O.M. No. 45439/F., dated 27.9.2002, have been pleased to decide that the existing maximum limit of accumulation of Earned Leave as fixed in Para-4 (a) of the FDOM No. 55423/F., dated 14.11.86, is enhanced to 300 days. All other conditions in the said O.M. remain unaltered subject to further condition that the maximum limit of 120 days appearing under Para 4 (c) is enhanced to 150 days.

3. This order shall take effect from 1st July, 02.

4. Formal amendment to Odisha Service Code & Odisha Leave Rules 1966 will be issued in due course.

5. In order to make more clear about the above provisions, the following illustration may be taken into account by all concerned.

ILLUSTRATION

That maximum limit of encashment of unutilised E.L. in respect of different categories of cases as enumerated in Para-4 (b) of the F.D.O.M. No. 55423/F., dated 14.11.86 is limited to -

248 days (240 + 8 days from July, 02 to Sept. 02) by 30.09.02 250 days (240 + 10 days from July, 02 to Oct. 02) by 31.10.02 253 days (240 + 13 days from July, 02 to Nov. 02) by 30.11.02 255 days (240 + 15 days from July, 02 to Dec. 02) by 31.12.02 258 days (240 + 18 days from July, 02 to Jan. 03) by 31.01.03 & so on

(F.D. No. CS-II-32/2002-7351/F., Dt. 19.02.2003)

ଅର୍ଜିତ ଛୁଟିର ଗ୍ରହଣୀୟତା

ADMISSIBILITY OF EARNED LEAVE

ଅର୍ଥ ବିଭାଗ କାର୍ଯ୍ୟାଳୟ ସ୍ମାରକ ସଂଖ୍ୟା ୪୫୪୩୯ / ଏଫ୍. ତା. ୨୭.୦୯.୨୦୦୨ରେ ଏହା ସରକାରଙ୍କ ଦ୍ବାର ସ୍ଥିର କରାଯାଇଛି ଯେ, ଅବ୍ୟବହୃତ ଅର୍ଜିତ ଛୁଟିର ସର୍ବୋଚ୍ଚ ସୀମା ୨୪୦ ଦିନ ୩୦୦ ଦିନକୁ, ୩୦.୯.୨୦୦୨ରୁ ପରିବଦ୍ଧନ କରାଗଲା । ସରକାରଙ୍କର ଉପରୋକ୍ତ ସିଦ୍ଧାନ୍ତଙ୍କୁ କାର୍ଯ୍ୟକାରୀ ନିମନ୍ତେ, ଏହା ଅନୁଭବ କରାଯାଇଛି ଯେ, ଅର୍ଥ ବିଭାଗ କାର୍ଯ୍ୟାଳୟ ସ୍ମାରକ ପତ୍ର ସଂଖ୍ୟା ୫୫୪୨୩/ଏଫ୍, ତା. ୧୪.୧୧.୧୯୮୬ର ପାରା ୪ (କ) ଅନୁଯାୟୀ ଅର୍ଜିତ ଛୁଟିର ୨୪୦ ଦିନର

ଗଚ୍ଛିତ ସୀମାକୁ, ୩୦୦ ଦିନକୁ ପରିବର୍ତନ କରାଯିବା ଆବଶ୍ୟକ । (ଅର୍ଥ ବିଭାଗ ସ୍ମାରକ ସଂଖ୍ୟା ୩୨/୨୦୦୨-୭୩୫୧/ଅର୍ଥ, ତା. ୯.୦୨.୨୦୦୩)

ରାଜ୍ୟ ସରକାର ମଧ୍ୟ ଏହା ସ୍ଥିର କରିଛନ୍ତି ଯେ, ଅବସର ସମୟରେ କୌଣସି କର୍ମଚାରୀଙ୍କର ସପକ୍ଷ୍ୟରେ ଥ‌ିବା ଅବ୍ୟବହୃତ ଅର୍ଜିତ ଛୁଟିର ସର୍ବୋଚ୍ଚ ସୀମା ୨୪୦ ଦିନରୁ ୩୦୦ ଦିନକୁ, ସେ ଅର୍ଥ ଦ୍ୱାରା ବିନିମୟ କରିପାରିବେ । ଏହି ଅତିରିକ୍ତ ସୀମା, ସମସ୍ତ କର୍ମଚାରୀଙ୍କ ପ୍ରତି ପ୍ରୟୋଗ ହେବ ଯେଉଁମାନେ ୩୦ ସେପ୍ଟେମ୍ବର ୨୦୦୨ରେ କିମ୍ବା ତା ପରେ ଅବସର ଗ୍ରହଣ କରିବେ । ଏହି ବର୍ଷିତ ସୀମା ସେହି ସମସ୍ତ କର୍ମଚାରୀଙ୍କ ନିମନ୍ତେ ପ୍ରୟୋଗ ହେବ ନାହିଁ, ଯେଉଁମାନେ ପୂର୍ବରୁ ଅବସର ଗ୍ରହଣ କରିଛନ୍ତି ।

(ขย์ จิตต เดด ๙๗พ८४/९००-४४४१०/वर्थ, ๑๗. १७.०९.१००१)

ODISHA LEAVE RULES, 1966

1. (1) These rules may be called the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966.

(2) They shall come into force from the Ist August, 1966.

2. (1) These rules apply to all Government servants in Class 1, Class II and Class III State Civil Services, except -

(a) in the case of Government servants who served in the Province of Bihar and Odisha prior to the Ist April 1936-

(i) those who held a lien or a suspended lien on a permanent post on the 31st August 1932; and

(ii) those who having entered Government service before the Ist September, 1931, in temporary or officiating capacity or as probationers and having continued in the service of Govt. without break since that date held a lien or a suspended lien on a permanent post on the Ist January, 1939; and

(b) in the case of Government servants transferred from the Government of India and other State Governments, those who had not come under the operation of the Revised Leave Rules of those Governments

(2) These rules also apply to all Government servants in Class IV Service, except:

(a) those who having entered permanent service in the Province of Bihar and Odisha on or before the 31st August 1932, elected not to be governed by the rules hereby repealed:
(b) those transferred from Madras who had not come under the operation of the Madras Leave Rules, 1933 and who did not elect to come under the rules hereby repealed.

Note: The leave terms of Government servants governed by the exceptions provided in this rule are regulated by the rules in Chapter VI of the Odisha Service Code.

(3) Nothing in these rules shall apply to persons in respect of whom special provisions regarding leave have been made by Government.

3. In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires :

(i) 'Annexure' means the Annexure to these rules;

(ii) 'Commuted leave' means leave taken under sub-rule (3) of rule 9;

(iii) 'Completed year of service', 'one year continuous service' and 'three years' 'continuous service' means continuous service of the specified duration under the Govt. and includes periods spent on duty as well as on leave, including extraordinary leave.

(iv) 'Earned leave' means leave eamed in respect of periods spent on duty;

(v) 'Earned leave due' means the amount of earned leave to the credit of an officer on the 31st July 1966, under the rules in force on that date plus the amount of earned leave calculated as prescribed in rules 7, 8 and 10, as the case may be, diminished by the amount of earned leave which has been taken and one-half of the amount of special disability leave on full pay admissible under rule 176 (g) of the Odisha Service Code taken after the 31st July, 1966;

(vi) 'Government' means the State Government of Odisha;

(vii) 'Half-pay leave' means leave earned in respect of completed years of service as provided in rule 9;

(viii) Half-pay leave due' means the amount of half-pay leave calculated as prescribed in rule 9 for the entire service diminished by the amount of leave on private affairs and leave on medical certificate taken before the 1st November 1951 and half-pay leave taken on or after that date.

Explanation: Leave on quarter average pay availed of prior to the Ist November, 1951 shall be deemed to be half-pay leave for the purpose of this clause.

(ix) Service and State Civil Service' shall have the same meaning as are assigned to them in the Odisha Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1962.

4. All rules in the Odisha Service Code in so far as they are not inconsistent with these rules shall apply mutatis mutandis to all persons to whom these rules apply in respect of matter covered by these rules.
5. Any kind of leave under these rules may be granted in combination with or in continuation of any other kind of leave.

6. No leave shall be granted beyond the date on which a servant compulsorily retires: Government Provided that if in sufficient time before the date of compulsory retirement, a Government servant has been denied in whole or in part, on account of exigencies of public service, any leave applied for and due as preparatory to retirement, then he may be granted, after the date of compulsory retirement the amount of earned leave which was due to him on the said date of compulsory retirement subject to the maximum lima of 120 or 180 days, as the case may be, as prescribed in rule 7 so long as the leave so granted including the leave granted to him between the date from which the leave preparatory to retirement was to commence and the date of compulsory retirement, does not exceed the amount of the leave preparato to retirement actually denied, the half-pay leave, if any, applied for by Govt. servant preparatory to retirement and denied in the exigencies of public service being exchanged with eamed leave to the extent such leave was earned between the date from which the leave preparatory to retirement was commenced and the date of compulsory retirement.

Provided further that a Government servant whose service has been extended in the interest of the public service beyond the date of his compulsory retirement may be granted earned leave as under:

(i) during the period of extension, any earned leave due in respect of the period of such extension and to the extent necessary, the eamed leave which could have been granted to him under the preceding proviso had he retired on the date of compulsory retirement;

(ii) after the expiry of the period of extension;

(a) the earned leave which could have been granted to him under the preceding proviso, had he retired on the date of compulsory retirement, diminished by the amount of such leave availed of during the period of extension, and

(b) any leave earned during the period of extension as has been formally applied for as preparatory to final cessation of his duties in sufficient time during the extension and refused to him on account of the exigencies of the public service; and

(iii) in determining the amount of earned leave due in respect of the extension with reference to rule 7, the earned leave, if any, admissible under the preceding proviso shall be taken into account.

Explanation: For the purpose of this rule, a Government servar may be deemed to have been denied leave only if, in sufficient time before the date on which he must compulsorily retire or the date on which bis duties finally cease, he has either formally applied for leave as preparatory to retirement and has been refused it on the ground of exigencies of public service or has ascertained in writing from the sanctioning authority that such leave, if applied for, would not be granted on the aforesaid ground.

7. (1) The earned leave admissible to a permanent Government servant is one-eleventh of the period spent on duty:

Provided that he will cease to earn leave when the earned leave due amounts to 180 days.

(Since changed to 240 days)

(2) the maximum earned leave that may be granted at a time to a Government servant shall be 120 days:

Provided that in case of Government servant in Class I State Civil Service earned leave may be granted for a period exceeding 120 days, but not exceeding 180 days, if the entire leave so granted or any portion thereof is spent outside India and Nepal:

Provided further where the earned leave exceeding a period of 120 days is granted under this sub-rule, the period of such leave spent in India shall not, in the aggregate, exceed 120 days.

Explanation: In this rule 'Permanent Government servant' includes a probationer.

8. The earned leave admissible to a permanent Government servant in a Vacation Department is subject to the following conditions, namely:

(a) for each year of duty in which a Government servant has availed himself of the vacation his earned leave shall be reduced as follows:

(i) for Subordinate Judges and Munsifs by fifteen days;

(ii) for all other Government servants by thirty days (now twenty days in case of officers of Education Department and teaching staff of Industries Department).

(b) If a part of the vacation has been taken in any year, the period by which the earned leave shall be reduced shall be fraction of fifteen days, or thirty days, as the case may be, to the proportion which the part of the vacation taken bears to the full period of vacation.

(c) In cases of urgent necessity the earned leave as reduced in clauses (a) and (b) of this rule may, except in case of Subordinate Judges and Munsifs be increased by one-twenty second of the period of duty in a Vacation Department.

(d) Vacation may be taken in combination with or in continuation of any kind of leave under these rules, provided that the total duration of vacation and earned leave taken in conduction shall not exceed 180 days:

Provided further that the total duration of vacation, earned leave and commuted leave taken in conjunction shall not exceed 240 days.
Explanation: For the purpose of this rule, vacation counts as duty. 9. (1) The half-pay leave admissible to a Government servant in permanent employ in respect of each completed year of service shall be twenty days.

(2) The half-pay leave due may be granted to a Government servant on medical certificate or on private affairs.

(3) Commuted leave not exceeding half the amount of half-pay leave due may be granted on medical certificate only to a Government servant in permanent employ subject to the following conditions, namely

(1) Commuted leave during the entire service shall be limited to a maximum of 240 days, (ii) When commuted leave is granted, twice the amount of such leave shall be debited against the half-pay leave due,

(iii) The total duration of eamed leave and commuted leave taken in conjunction shall not exceed 240 days:

Provided that no commuted leave may be granted under this sub- rule unless the authority competent to sanction leave has reason to believe that the officer will return to duty on its expiry.

10. Save in the case of leave preparatory to retirement, leave not due may be granted to a permanent Govt. servant for a period not exceeding 360 days during his entire service :

Provided that this leave may be granted on grounds other than on medical certificate up to 90 days at a time and 180 days in all. Leave not due shall be debited against the half-pay leave the officer may eam subsequently on return to duty.

Note 1: Leave not due should be granted only if the authority empowered to sanction leave is satisfied that there is a reasonable prospect of the Govt. servant returning to duty on the expiry of the leave and ti should be limited to the half-pay leave he is likely to earn thereafter.

Note: 2 Where a Government servant who has been granted leave not due under this clause applies for permission to retire voluntarily, the leave not due shall, if the permission is granted, be cancelled.

11. The provisions contained in rules 7, 8 and 9 apply also to a Government servant not in permanent employ except that in respect of the first year of service, the earned leave admissible is one-twenty second of the period spent on duty:

Provided that no eamed leave shall be admissible to such a Govt servant in a Vacation Department in respect of the first year of his service Provided further that no half-pay leave may be granted to a Govt. servant not in permanent employ unless the authority competent to sanction leave has reason to believe that the Government servant will return to duty on its expiry.

Explanation: For the purpose of this rule 'Government servant not in permanent employ' includes a reemployed pensioner.

12. A Government servant not in permanent employ appointed without interruption of duty substantively to a permanent post will be credited with the earned leave which would have been admissible if his previous duty had been duty as a Government servant in permanent employ diminished by any earned leave already taken. Leave is not interruption of duty for the purpose of this rule.

13. (1) Extraordinary leave may be granted to any Government servant in special circumstances -

(i) When no other leave is by rule admissible, or

(ii) When other leave is admissible, but the Government servant concerned applies in writing for the grant of extraordinary leave.

(2) Except in the case of a permanent Government servant and a Government servant who has rendered not less than three years continuous service, the duration of extraordinary leave on any one occasion shall not exceed the following limits, namely:

(i) two months;

(ii) four months in special cases, where such leave is supported by a medical certificate as required under rules;

(iii) eighteen months where the Government servant is undergoing treatment for -

(a) pulmonary tuberculosis either in a recognised sanatorium or at his residence under a tuberculosis specialist recognised as such by the State Administrative Medical Officer concerned; or

(b) tuberculosis of any other part of the body by a qualified tuberculosis specialist or a Chief District Medical Officer; or

(c) leprosy, in a recognised leprosy institution, or by a Chief District Medical Officer or a specialist in leprosy recognised as such by the State Administrative Medical Officer concerned:

Provided that the concession of extraordinary leave up to eighteen months under clause (iii) of this sub-rule shall be admissible only to those Government servants who have been in continuous Government service for a period exceeding one year.

Provided further that in the case of treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis at the residence, the Government servant shall produce a certificate to the effect that he is under his treatment and that he has reasonable chances of recovery on the expiry of the leave recommended.
3) Subject to the provision of rule 14, a Government servant not in permanent employ may be granted during deputation on training, extraordinary leave from the date of his relief till the date of resumption of duties on retum from training: provided that he has completed a minimum period of one year continuous service on the date of deputation and the authority competent to grant the leave is satisfied that such training is necessary for improving the Government servant's professional knowledge.

(4) Where a Government servant who is not in permanent employ fails to resume duty on the expiry of the maximum period of extraordinary leave granted to him or where such Government servant who is granted a lesser amount of extraordinary leave than the maximum amount admissible, remains absent from duty for any period which together with the extraordinary leave granted exceeds the limit up to which he could have been granted such leave under these rules, he shall, unless the State Govt. in view of the exceptional circumstances of the case otherwise determine, be removed from service after following the procedure laid down in Odisha Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules 1962.

14. The grant of leave to non-permanent Government servant shall be subject to the condition that but for the grant of leave, he would have continued to hold a post in Govt. service until the expiry of the leave.

15. A Govt. servant in the regular establishment who is transferred

to the work-charged establishment shall continue to be treated as on duty

and be governed by the leave rules applicable to him prior to his transfer:

Provided that a Government servant not in permanent employ shall be governed by provisions of this rule for so long as he would have continued but for his transfer, to hold a post in the regular establishment.

16. If an interruption of duty other than leave or service in work- charged establishment which is not treated as duty under rule 15 occurs in the service of a temporary Govt. servant, the leave at his credit shall lapse.

17. (1) Except as provided in sub-rule (2), a Government servant on earned leave is entitled to leave salary equal to the average monthly pay eamed during the ten completed months immediately preceding the month in which the leave commences or the substantive pay to which the Government servant is entitled immediately before the commencement of the leave, whichever is greater.

(2) A Govemment servant who proceeds on earned leave from a post, the maximum of which does not exceed Rs. 100 per mensem, is entitled to leave salary equal to the pay drawn immediately before proceeding on leave.

(3) A Government servant on half-pay leave or leave not due is entitled to leave salary equal to half the amount specified in sub-rule (1) of sub-rule (2), as the case may be, subject to a maximum of Rs. 750:
Provided that this limit shall not apply if the leave is on medical certificate or for pursuing an approved course of study, otherwise than on study leave terms.

(4) Subject to the condition that his leave salary shall in no case exceed the amount admissible under sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) the leave salary drawn by a Government servant on leave out of India and Nepal is subject to a minimum of Rs. 250 per mensem.

(5) A Government servant on commuted leave is entitled to leave salary equal to the amount admissible under sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2), as the case may be.

(6) A Government servant on extraordinary leave is not entitled to any leave salary.

Explanation 1: In respect of any period spent on foreign service out of India, the pay which the Government servant would have drawn if on duty in India but for foreign service out of India shall be substituted for the pay actually drawn while calculating average pay.

Explanation 2: For the purpose of this rule 'Substantive pay' means the substantive pay of the permanent post which the Government servant holds substantively or on which he holds a lien or would hold a lien, had the lien not been suspended and includes special pay shown as part of the scale of pay of the post.

18. A leave Account shall be maintained for every Government servant in the form specified in the Annexure.

19. The Odisha Leave Rules, 1939, are hereby repealed: Provided that any order made or action taken under the rules so repealed shall be deemed to have been made or taken under these rules.

20. If any question arises relating to the interpretation of these rules, it should be referred to the State Government whose decision thereon shall be final.

ANNEXURE (See Rule 18)

FORM OF LEAVE ACCOUNT

Name of Government servant..........................(on private affairs and on medical certificate)

Date of Birth..........

Date of commencement of continuous service..........

Date of retirement/registration.......... including commuted leave and leave not due. 

Note 1: The Earmed Leave due should be expressed in days.

Note 2: When a Government servant is appointed during the course of a particular calendar hall year, E.L should be credited @ 2½ days for each completed month and the fraction of a day will be rounded to the nearest day.

Note 3: The old leave account in respect of existing Govt. servants has to be closed and the balance as on 31.12.75 will have to be carried forward to the new account in Col. 11. While doing so, the balance at credit on 31.12.75 may be rounded off to the nearest day.

Note 4: The entries in Col. 6 should be in complete days. Fraction of a day will be rounded to the nearest day.

Note 5 Period of extraordinary leave should be noted in red ink.

Note 6: The entries in Col. 12 and 13 should indicate only the beginning and end of completed years of service at the time the half-pay leave commences. Where a Government servant completes another Near of service while on half-pay leave, the extra credit should be shown in Col. 12 to 16 by making suitable additional entries and this should be taken into account while completing Col. 32.

LEAVE ADMISSIBE FOR OLD, NEW, TEMPORARY GOVT. SERVANTS AND PROBATIONERS

LEAVE

SECTION-1

GENERAL CONDITIONS OF LEAVE

Rule 130: Any leave admissible under these rules may be granted by the State Government.

(For delegation under these rules, see Appendix 1 of OSC)

Rule 130-A: The procedure regarding application for leave, the grant of leave and payment of leave salary is regulated by the rules contained in Appendix 13.

Rule 131: Leave cannot be claimed as of right. When the exigencies of the public service so requires, discretion to refuse or revoke leave on any description is reserved to the authority empowered to grant it.

Rule 132: Leave may not be granted to a Government servant under suspension.

Rule 133: Leave shall be earned by duty only.

Explanation: For the purpose of this rule, the period spent on foreign service counts as duty, if, on account of such period, contribution towards leave salary has been either received or remitted by Government.

Rule 134: Omitted.
Rule 135: Unless it be otherwise provided in the rules in Section 1 to V or Section VII this Chapter -

(a) A permanent Government servant transferred temporarily to a service or post to which those rules apply from a service or post to which they do not apply, shall remain subject to the leave rules which were applicable to him prior to his transfer.

(b) A permanent Government to whom these rules do not apply shall, (1) when appointed substantively to a permanent post to which these rules apply, become subject to the leave rules as contained in Section DtoDV or Section VII of this Chapter from the date of such appointment. The leave at his credit under the rules therefore applicable to him shall be carried forward subject to the maximum limit of accumulation as prescribed in the rules in the said Section i to V or Section VII.

(2)

(3)

Rule 136: (a) If a Government servant who quits the public service on compensation or invalid pension or gratuity, is re-employed and if his gratuity is thereupon refunded or his pensionheld wholly in abeyance, his past service thereby becoming pensionable on ultimate retirement, he may, at the discretion of the authority sanctioning the re-employment and to such extent as the authority may decide count his former service towards leave.

(b) A Government servant, who is dismissed or removed from the public service, but is reinstated on appeal or revision in entitled to count his former service towards leave.

Rule 137: (a) Except as otherwise provided by this rule -

(i) Leave begins on the day on which transfer of charge is effected, or, if charge is transferred afternoon, on the following day; and

(ii) Leave ends on the day on which charge is resumed, or, if charge is resumed before noon, on the preceding day.

(b) When joining time is allowed to a Govt. servant under clause (b) or rule 198 it shall be assumed that he has availed himself of the full period of joining time admissible to him before resuming charge and his leave ends on the day before such period of joining time commences.

(c) When a Government servant is permitted under rule 138 to suffix holidays to leave, his leave begins on the first day after the holidays

(d) When a Govt. servant is permitted under rule 138 to suffix holidays to leave or to joining time taken on retum from leave, his leave ends on the day on which it would have ended if the holidays had not been suffixed.

(e) When a Government servant is permitted under rule 139 to combine leave with vacation, his leave begins or ends on the day on which it would have begun or ended if it had not been combined with vacation.
Rule 138: (a) When the day immediately preceding that on which a Govt. servant's leave begins is a holiday or one of a series of holidays the Government servant may be permitted to leave his station at the close of the day before such holiday or series of holidays. The enjoyment of this concession is subject to the following conditions -

(1) His transfer of charge must not involve the handing over of securities or of moneys other than a permanent advance: provided that this condition may be waived by the State Government in any particular case in which the Government servant undertakes to remain responsible for the securities in this charge.

(2) His early departure must not involve a correspondingly early transfer from another station of a Government servant to perform his duties.

(3) His absence during the holidays must not operate unfairly to any Government servant who during such absence, may be actually performing the duties of his post or of another similar post.

(b) A Government servant will not be permitted to affix holidays to his leave or joining time except when no substitute has been appointed during the leave or he has not to relieve another Government servant on the expiry of his joining time.

Note: Subject to the conditions prescribed in this rule a Subordinate Judge or Munsif may prefix to his leave local holidays notified by the High Court, if he proceeds on leave from a station where such holidays are observed; and he may suffix to his leave or joining time local holidays notified by the High Court, if he returns to a station where such holidays are observed.

Rule 139: Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (b) of rule 138, a Govt. servant serving in a Vacation Department and District and Sessions Judges may be permitted to combine vacation with leave either at the beginning or the end thereof: provided that -

(1) no additional expense shall be incurred by the State by the State for the period of the vacation;

(2) vacation shall not be both prefixed and suffixed to leave;

(3) leave shall not be both prefixed and suffixed to vacation; and

(4) the period of vacation shall be reckoned as leave in calculating the maximum amount of leave on average pay which may be granted at one time under rule 157.

Rule 140: No Government servant who has been granted leave on medical certificate may return to duty without first producing a medical certificate of fitness in the following form

We/I do hereby certify that We/l have carefully examined............... of the............... whose signature is given below and that We/l consider him fit to resume his duties in Government service.
Signature of the applicant...............Dated the.................
Signature of the Examining Authority/Authorities...............

If the Govemment servant on leave is a gazetted officer such certificate should be signed by a commissioned medical officer or a medical officer in should bef sa civil station. If the Government servant on leave is not a chatted officer, the authority under which the Government servant will be employed on return from leave may in its discretion, accept a certificate signed by any registered medical practitioner.

A Government servant who has been granted leave for reasons of health even though such leave was not actually granted on medical certificate may be required by the authority which granted the leave to produce a similar certificate.

Rule 141: Unless he is permitted to do so by the authority which granted his leave, a Govt. servant on leave may not return to duty more than fourteen days before the expiry of the period of leave granted to him.

Rule 142: All orders recalling a Government servant to duty before the expiry of his leave should state whether the return to duty is optional, or compulsory. If the return is optional, the Govt. servant is entitled to no concession. If it is compulsory, he is entitled -

(a) If the leave from which he is recalled is out of India -

(i) to receive free passage to India, and, if he has not completed half the period of his leave by the date of leaving for India on recall, or three months whichever period is short to receive a refund of the cost of his passage from India;

(ii) to count the time spent on the voyage to India as duty for purpose of calculating leave; and

(iii) to receive leave salary during the voyage to India and for the period from the date of landing in India to the date of joining his post to be paid leave salary at the same rate at which he would have drawn it has he not been recalled but returned in the ordinary course on the termination of his leave.

(b) If the leave from which he is recalled is in India, to be treated as on duty from the date on which he starts for the station to which he is ordered, but to draw until he joins his post leave salary only.

(See also Odisha Travelling Allowance Rules 113 and 114 and Article 423 of Civil Service Regulation)

Rule 143: Omitted.

Rule 144: A Government servant who remains absent after the end of his leave is entitled to no leave salary for the period of such absence, and that period will be debited against his leave account as though it were leave on half average pay, unless his leave is extended by the State Government. Wilful absence from duty after the expiry of leave may be treated as misconduct for the purpose of rule 54.

Note: See Note 2 under rule 79 (b) (2) (For delegation made under this rule see Appendix 1 of OSC)

Rule 145: Absence from duty for short periods on casual leave is not governed by the rules in this Chapter.

Note: The condition on which such leave may be granted to a Government servant are set out in Appendix 6.

Rule 146: (1) A Govt. servant on leave may not take any service or accept any employment including the setting up of a private professional practice as accountant, consultant or legal or medical practitioner without obtaining the previous sanction of the authority empowered to appoint him:

Provided that a Government servant who has been granted permission to take any service or accept any employment under this rule, during leave preparatory to retirement, shall be precluded, save with the specific consent of the authority empowered to appoint him, from withdrawing his request for permission to retire, and from retuming to duty.

Note 1: This rule does not apply to casual literacy work or to service as an examiner or similar employment nor does it apply to acceptance of foreign service which is governed by rule 122.

Note 2: This rule does not apply where a Govt. servant has been allowed to take up a limited amount of private practice and receives fees therefor as a part of his conditions of services, e.g., where a right of private practice has been granted to medical officer.

(2) The leave salary of a Government servant who is permitted to take up employment under another Government or a private employer during leave shall be subject to such restrictions as the State Government may decide.

SECTION - II ORDINARY LEAVE RULES

Rule 147: The rules in Section III to V shall apply to Government servants who are not subject to the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966.

Rule 148: Omitted.

SECTION-III LEAVE ACCOUNT

Rule 149: A leave account shall be maintained for each Government servant in terms of leave on average pay.
Note: Leave account for the Government servants governed by the rules in this Chapter shall be maintained in Comptroller and Auditor General's Form A.C.T. 2.

Rule 150: (a) In the leave account of a Government servant who on his entry into Government service becomes subject to these rules, there shall be credited two-elevenths of the period spent on duty.

(b) In the leave account of a Government servant who immediately prior to the 1st April, 1936, either was serving in the Province of Bihar and Odisha and was subject to the Leave Rules in Bihar and Odisha Service Code corresponding to these rules or was serving in the Province of Madras and was subject to Fundamental Rules and the Subsidiary Rules of Madras Government, there shall be credited the periods entered to his credit in the leave account maintained for him under those rules up to the 1st April, 1939 and in addition 2/11th of the period spent on duty subsequent to that date.

(c) A Govt. servant transferred permanently from Military to Civil employ is entitled to a credit to his leave account based on such portion of his military duty as, under the rules for the time being in force, is eligible to count for pension.

(d) When a Government servant is placed on deputation while on leave out of India, the deputation shall be regarded as an interruption of leave already granted. In such a case, the balance of the unenjoyed leave shall be worked out before the deputation intervenes and the amount of leave to be enjoyed subsequently on the expiry of the deputation shall be restricted to this available balance.

Rule 151: Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Chapter, the amount of leave debited against a Govt. servant's leave account is -

(a) the actual period of leave on average pay

(b) half the period of leave on half or quarter average pay.

(c) half the period of leave under rule 176 (g) (ii) if taken on average pay

(d) half the period of overstayal of leave under rule 144

Note 1: Furlough on average salary taken under rules previously in force is to be debited under (a) above, but privilege leave is not to be so debited.

Note 2: Furlough (other than furlough on an average salary,) leave on medical certificate and special leave with allowances, taken under rules previously in force, are to be debited under (b) above.

Note 3: In cases covered by rule 150 (c) the leave taken during the periced of duty on which the credit in the leave account is bases, is to be debited as prescribed in Notes 1 and 2 above.
Rule 152: Omitted.

Rule 153: When a Government servant is permanently transferred from service under another Government to a post to which these rules apply, there shall be carried forward in his leave account the amount of leave then standing to his credit or debit under the rules of the Government from the control of which he is transferred. In cases of doubt the State Government shall decide how much leave shall be carried forward in his leave account at the time of transfer. From the date of his transfer, he shall earn leave in accordance with these rules.-

Rule 154: The amount of leave due to a Government servant is the balance of leave at his credit in the leave account.

SECTION-IV GRANT OF LEAVE

Rule 155: The total amount of leave, expressed in terms of average pay, which may be granted to a Government servant shall not exceed -

(a) One-eleventh of the period spent on duty or, in the case of a Govt. servant who has formerly been subject to leave rules contained in the Civil Service Regulations, the period of privilege leave which it would have been permissible to grant to him under those rules on the date on which he ceases to be subject to them, plus one-eleventh of the period on duty subsequent to that; plus

(b) two and a half year;

Provided that in calculating the maximum leave prescribed in this rule, account shall not be taken of any period of leave which is not debitable to the leave account.

Rule 156: The total amount of leave on average pay, including furlough on average salary taken under rules previously in force, which may be granted to a Government servant shall not exceed one-eleventh of the period on duty;

Provided that when a Government servant either takes leave on medical certificate other than leave preparatory to retirement or spends his leave elsewhere than in India, Pakistan, Ceylon, Nepal or Burma, the limit may be increases by one year.

Rule 157: The maximum period of leave on average pay which may be granted in each separate period of leave is four months;

Provided that when a Government servant either takes leave on medical certificate other than leave preparatory to retirement or spends in his leave elsewhere than in India, Pakistan, Ceylon, Nepal or Burma, the maximum period admissible to him shall be eight months.

Rule 158: (a) Save in the case of leave preparatory to retirement, leave not due may be granted subject to the following conditions -
(i) on medical certificate, without limit of amount; and

(ii) otherwise than on medical certificate for not more than three months at any one time and six months in all reckoned in terms of leave on average pay;

Provided that such leave shall not be granted to a Government servant unless there is a reasonable prospect that he will return to duty and eam an equivalent amount of leave.

Note 1: In cases where a Government servant who has been granted leave not due under this clause applied for permission to retire voluntarily the leave not due shall, if the permission be granted be cancelled and his retirement shall have effect from the date on which such leave commerniced.

(b) When a Government servant returns from leave which was not due and which was debited against his leave account, no leave will become due to him until after he has earned a credit of leave equal to the period which he took before it was due. Rule 159: (1) Extraordinary leave may be granted in special circumstances -

(i) when no other kind of leave is admissible; or

(ii) when any other kind of leave being admissible, the Govt. servant concerned applied in writing for the grant of extraordinary leave.

(2) The authority which has the power to sanction leave may (a) grant extraordinary leave under sub-rule (1) in combination with, or in continuation of, any kind of leave that is admissible and (b) retrospectively covert periods of absence with leave into extraordinary leave.

(3) Extraordinary leave is not debited against leave account and no leave salary is admissible during such leave.

Rule 160: The maximum period of continuous absence from duty on leave, or on vacation and leave combined, is twenty-eight months: provided that, in calculating this maximum, account shall not be taken of leave granted on medical certificate or extraordinary leave. This period shall in no circumstances be exceeded by a Government servant who is on leave preparatory to retirement.

Rule 161: Omitted.

Rule 162: Leave at the credit of a Government servant in his leave account shall lapse on the date of compulsory retirement, provided that if, in sufficient time before that date, he has -

(1) formally applied for leave due as preparatory to retirement and been refused; or

(2) ascertained in writing from the sanctioning authority that such leave, if applied for, would not be granted, in either case the ground of refusal being the requirement of the public service, then the Government servant may be granted, after the date of retirement the amount of leave so refused, subject to a maximum of six months.

Rule 163: The following provisions apply to vacation departments only

(a) except as otherwise expressly provided in these rules, vacation counts as duty. But, for each year of duty in which a Government servant has availed himself of the vacation, the periods of total leave in rules 150, 155 and 156 shall be reduced as follows -

(i) for subordinate judges and munsifs, by fifteen days; (ii) for all other Government servants, by one month.

(b) If a part only of the vacation has been taken in any year, the period to be deducted will be a fraction of fifteen days or of a month, as the case may be, equal to the proportion which the part of the vacation taken bears to the full period of the vacation.

(c) In cases of urgent necessity the periods of total leave in rules 150 and 155 as reduced by clauses (a) and (b) of this rule, may, except in the case of subordinate judge and munsifs, be increased by one month for every two years of duty in a vacation department.

SECTION-V

LEAVE SALARY

Rule 164: Subject to the conditions in rules 156, 157, 159,

163, 165, 166, 167 and 168 a Govt. servant on leave shall, during leave, draw leave salary as follows - (a) If the above in due, leave salary equal to average pay, or to half-average pay, or to average pay during the earlier portion of the leave and half-average pay during the remainder, as he may elect and

(b) if the leave is not due, leave salary equal to half-average pay;

Provided that, for the purpose of this rule, the average pay of a Government servant who entered Government service on or after the 1st June 1929 shall, if such Government servant has been transferred as a penalty to a lower grade or post during the twelve months immediately preceding the commencement of his leave, be taken to be pay of the grade or post to which he has been so transferred:

Provided further that when a non-gazetted Govt. servant who was in service on the 24th day of August, 1927 takes leave, and

(i) his pay is less than Rs. 300/-; or

(ii) the leave taken does not exceed one month, his average pay for the purpose of this rule may be taken to be the pay which he would draw in the permanent post held substantively by him at the time of taking leave if this pay be more than the average pay.

Rule 165: After continuous absence from duty for a period of 28 months of leave other than extraordinary leave, or on vacation combined with such leave, a Government servant will draw leave salary equal to quarter-average pay, subject to the maximum and minima prescribed in rules 166 and 167.

Rule 166: Except during the first four months of any period of leave on average pay leave salary is subject to the monthly maxima shown in the following table:

Average          Rs. 1,500

Half-average          Rs. 750

Quarter-average          Rs. 600

Note: The maximum of average pay does not apply to a Government servant serving in a vacation department during a period of leave on average pay equivalent to one month for each year since his last leave during which he has not availed himself of the vacation, and to a proportionate fraction of a month during which he has taken a part only of the vacation: provided that, in the case of a Government servant who is transferred with leave to his credit from a non-vacation to a vacation department the State Govt. shall decide on the first occasion on which he takes leave after such transfer, the period not exceeding four months for which the maximum limit of leave salary shall not be applied to them.

Rule 167: Subject to the condition that his leave salary shall in no case exceed his average pay, the leave salary drawn by a Government servant on leave out of India elsewhere than in Ceylon, Pakistan, Nepal or Burma, is subject to the monthly minima shown in the following table -

Half-average          Rs. 250

Quarter-average          Rs. 125

Rule 168: Unless the State Govemment by general or special order otherwise directs, leave salary shall be drawn in rupees in India.

Rule 169: Omitted.

SECTION-VI EXCEPTION

Sub-section (1): Military officers in Civil employ.

Rule 170: Omitted.

Sub-section (2): Part-time Government servants and Government servants remunerated by honoraria or daily wages.
Rule 171: (a) A Law Officer holding the post of Advocate-General, Odisha, or Government Pleader and Public Prosecutor for Odisha may be granted leave as follows:

(i) He may be granted leave during the vacation of the High Court, ordinarily for half the period of the vacation provided that no extra expense to Govt. shall be caused thereby and, in the case of Govt. Pleader and Public Prosecutor, that arrangements are made for appearance on behalf of the President during the period with the approval of Govt. Such leave counts as duty and leave salary shall be equal to the pay drawn at the time of taking leave.

Note: This rule is subject in the cases of the Advocate-General and of the Government Pleader and Public Prosecutor to the provisions of rules 24 and 39 respectively of the rules relating to these officers. If the exigencies of the public service require the presence of the Advocate-General in Cuttack, Delhi, during more than half of the High Court vacation or on any day or days included in the leave granted to him under the above rule that fact will not entitle him to any remuneration other than that specified in rules 23 and 38 of the rules relating to these officers, as the case may be.

(ii) After not less than six years of duty, he may be granted leave for a period not exceeding six months. Such leave shall be granted only once in his service, and leave salary shall be equal to half the pay drawn at the time of taking leave.

(iii) He may be granted leave on medical certificate up to a maximum of twenty months at any one time provided that at least three years of duty shall intervene between any two periods of leave on medical certificate. Leave salary during such leave shall be equal to half the pay drawn at the time of taking leave. 

(iv) He may be granted extraordinary leave on the conditions prescribed in rule 159.

(b) Leave of any kind admissible under clause (a) of this rule may be combined with leave of any other kind admissible under that clause.

Rule 172: A Government servant remunerated by honoraria may be granted leave on the terms prescribed in rule 171: Provided that -

(1) he shall make satisfactory arrangements for the performance of his duties during his absence;

(2) ( no extra expense to Government shall be involved; and

3) during leave of the kind contemplated by clause (a) (ii) of rule 171 the whole of the honoraria shall be paid to the person who officiates in his post.

Rule 173: The following provisions apply to the establishment of the Public Works Deptt. charged to work or remunerated by daily wages:
a) Leave may not be granted to a member of such establishment except after the production of a medical certificate signed by a medical practitioner with qualification not less than those of a sub-assistant surgeon. It must be certified therein that the applicant is unfit for duty on account of ill-health, and the period for which leave is recommended must be definitely stated. maximum of three 

(b) Leave may be granted up to one month for each year of approved service under the Government, subject to a months at any one time: provided that no leave may in any case be granted unless the applicant has rendered approved service under Government for at least three years continuously.

(c) Leave salary shall be equal to half the pay drawn at the time of taking leave: provided that, in the case of a person to whom the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, applies the amount of leave salary payable under this clause shall be reduced by the amount of compensation payable under section 4 (1) D of the Act.

(d) Before retuming to duty the Government servant shall be required to produce a medical certificate, signed by a medical practitioner with qualification not less than those of a sub-assistant surgeon stating that he is fit to return to duty.

Rule 174: Omitted.

Sub-section (3): Employees paid from contingent grants

Rule 175: Employees paid from contingent grants may only be granted leave without allowance.

SECTION - VII SPECIAL CONCESSIONS

Sub-section (1): Special disability leave.

Rule 176: (a) Subject to the conditions hereinafter specified the State Government may grant special disability leave to a Government servant who is disabled by injury intentionally inflicted or caused in or in consequence of the due performance of his official duties or in consequence of his official position.

(b) Such leave shall not be granted unless the disability manifested itself within three months of the occurrence to which it is attributed, and the person disabled acted with due promptitude in bringing it to notice. But the State Government, if it is satisfied as to the cause of the disability, may permit leave to be granted in cases where the disability manifested itself more than three months after the occurrence of its cause.

(c) The period of leave granted shall be such as is certified by a medical board to be necessary. It shall not be extended except on the certificate of a medical board, and shall in no case exceed 24 months.

(d) Such leave may be combined with leave of any other kind.

(e) Such leave may be granted more than once if the disability is aggravated or reproduced in similar circumstances at a later date, but not more than 24 months of such leave shall be granted in consequence of any one disability.

(f) Such leave shall be counted as duty in calculating service for pension and shall not, except as provided in rule 151 (c) be debited against the leave account.

(g) Leave salary during such leave shall be equal -

(1) for the first four months of any period of such leave, including a period if such leave granted under clause, (e) of this rule, to average pay, and

(ii) for the remaining period of any such leave to half average pay, or at the Government servant's option, for a period not exceeding the period of average pay which would otherwise be admissible to him, to average pay:

Provided that the maxima specified in the table in rule 166 shall notwithstanding anything contained in that rule, apply to the whole period of such leave and the minima specified in the table in rule 167 shall apply when leave salary during such leave is equal to half average pay, subject to the conditions stated in that rule.

(h) In the case of a person to whom the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, applies, the amount of leave salary payable under this rule shall be reduced by the amount of compensation payable under section 4 (1) of the said Act.

(i) The provisions of this rule apply to a civil servant disabled in consequence of service with a military force if he is discharged aş unfit for further military service, but is not completely and permanently incapacitated for further civil service, and to a civil servant not so discharged who suffers a disability which is certified by a medical board to be directly attributable to his service with a military force; but in either case any period of leave granted to such a person under military rules in respect of that disability shall be reckoned as leave granted under this rule for the purpose of calculating the period admissible.

Rule 177: The State Government may in exceptional circumstances extent the application of the provisions of rule 176 to a Government servant who is disabled by injury accidentally incurred in or in consequence of the due performance of his official duties or in consequence of his official position, or by illness incurred in the performance of any particular duty which has the affect of increasing his liability to illness beyond the ordinary risk attacking to the civil post which he holds. The grant of this concessions is subject to the further conditions -

(i) that the liability, if due to disease, must be certified by a medical board to be directly due to the performance of the particular duty

(ii) that, if the Government servant has contacted such disability during service otherwise than with a military force, it must be so exceptiona sercicerocter of in the circumstances of its occurrence as to justily such unusual treatment as the grant of this form of leave; and

(iii) that the period of absence recommended by the medical board may be covered in part by leave under this rule and in part by other leave, and that the amount of special disability leave granted on average pay may be less than four months.

Rule 178: Omitted.

Sub-section (2): Study Leave

Rule 179: (a) Subject to the conditions hereinafter specified, the State Government may grant special study leave to a Govt. to enable him to study scientific, technical or similar problems or the undergo a special course of instruction. Such leave is not debited against the leave account

(b) These rules relate to study leave only. They are not intended to meet the case of Government servant deputed to other countries at the Instance of Govemment, either for the performance of special duties imposed on them or for the investigation of specific problems connected with their technical duties. Such cases will be dealt with on their merits under the provisions of rule 59. Such leave may be granted to a Government servant in the Public Health, Medical, Civil, Veterinary, Agriculture, Education, Public Works or Forest Department, or to any other Government servant to whom the State Government is of opinion that such leave should in the public interests, be granted.

Note: Save in very exceptional cases, study leave will not be granted to a member of Subordinate service.

Rule 180: Extra leave on half average pay for the purpose of study leave may be taken either in or outside India. Study leave will not *ordinarily be granted to Government servants of less than five years' service or to Government servants within three years of the date at which they have the option of retiring, or, if they have the option of retiring after 20 years' service, within three years of the date at which they will complete 25 years' service.

Rule 181: The grant of study leave will be made with due regard to the exigencies of the public service. In no case will be the grant of this leave, in combination with leave other than extraordinary leave or leave on medical certificate involve an absence of over 28 months from a Government servant's regular duties, or exceed two years in the whole period of a Government servant's service, not will it be granted with such frequency as to remove him from contact with his regular work or to cause cadre difficulties owing to his absence on leave. A period of 12 months at one time will ordinarily be regarded as a suitable maximum and will not be exceeded save for exceptional reasons.

Rule 181-A: In the case of an officer who has been admitted to the benefits of the rules for the assistance of officers on leave in the United Kingdom who wish to prosecute their legal studies at one of the Inns of Court, London, or the King's Inns, Dublin, study leave for a period of six months may be granted for the purpose of studying for the examinations prescribed for a call to the Bar on a programme approved by the High Commissioner, and of reading in the chambers of a practising barrister. Such reading, however, will be optional during this period. Study leave for a further period not exceeding twelve months may be granted after Part I of the Bar examination has been passed, for the purpose of reading in the chambers of a practising the barrister, and for completing the Bar examinations. The officer will be entitled to draw study allowance under rule 190 for periods not exceeding eighteen months in the aggregate, but these periods need not coincide with the periods for which he has been granted study leave.

Rule 182: A Government servant whose study leave is combined with any other kind of leave will be required to take his period of study leave at such a time as to retain, at its conclusion, a balance of other previously sanctioned leave sufficient to cover the period spent in returning to duty.

Rule 183: When a Government servant has been granted a definite period of study leave and finds subsequently that his course of study will fall short of the sanctioned period to any considerable extent, his absence from duty will be reduced by the excess period of study leave unless he produces the assent of the sanctioning authority in India to his taking it as ordinary leave.

Rule 184: Except as provided in rule 185, all applications for study leave should be submitted with the audit officer's certificate to the Head of the Deptt. through the prescribed channel, and the course or courses of study contemplated and any examination which the candidate proposes to undergo should be clearly specified therein.

If the course of study is in Europe or America, the Head of the Department should also forward to the Secretary to the High Commissioner for India, General Department, a copy of the approved programme of study. If it is not possible for the Government servant to give full details, as above, in his original application, or if, after leaving India, he wishes to make any changes in the programme which has been approved in India, he should submit particulars as soon as possible to the Secretary to the High Commissioner for India, General Department in such cases, he should not, unless prepared to do so at his own risk, commence the course of study, nor incur expenses in connection therewith until he received approval to the course through the High Commissioner.

Rule 185: Government servants on leave in Europe or America who wish to convert part of the leave into study leave or to undertake a course of study during leave should, before commencing study and before incurring any expenses in connection therewith submit a programme of their proposed course of study to the Secretary to the High Commissioner for India, General Department. The Programme should be accompanied by an official syllabus of the course, if one is available and, by any documentary evidence that the particular course, or examination has the approval of the authorities in India. In the absence of such evidence the programme may, if approved by the High Commissioner by proceeded with, but no study leave allowance will be admissible until the concurrence of the authority concerned in India is received.

Similarly, Government servant on leave in the United Kingdom who desire to have it extended for purposes of study under these rules, should address the Secretary to the High Commissioner for India, but in addition to fumishing a statement of the proposed study they must support their applications with documentary evidence of their having obtained the approval of the authorities concerned in India to their applying for an extension of leave. They must also produce documentary evidence of the concurrence of the authority concerned in India to the grant of study leave and/or study allowance.

Rule 186: No course of study will be recognised as qualifying for the grant of study allowance, or for study leave for any other purpose, unless it has been approved in at least broad outline by the sanctioning authority in India in accordance with rules 184 and 185 above and unless in cases where it has not been found possible to submit full particulars to the authorities in India, it has been approved in detail by the High Commissioner before it is begun.

Rule 187: A study allowance will be granted for the period spent in prosecuting a definite course of study at recognised institution or in any definite tour of inspection of any special class or work, as well as for the period covered by any examination at the end of the course of study. The rates as at present fixed are 16 S a day in the United Kingdom, day on the Continent of Europe, and 30 S a day in the United States of America. These rates are liable to revision. The rate to be granted to Government servants who take study leave in other countries, including India will be specially considered by the State Government in each case. In no case will subsistence be granted in addition to study allowance and ordinarily travelling expenses will not be paid, but in exceptional cases claims will be considered on their merits by the State Government.

(For delegation made under this rule, see Appendix 1 of OSC)

Rule 188: Study allowance will be admissible up to fourteen days for any period of vacation. A period during which a Government servant interrupts his course for his own convenience cannot be considered a vacation. In the case of a Government servant retiring from the service without returning to duty after a period of study leave the study allowance will be forfeited. If the Government servant is under civil leave rules the study will be converted into ordinary leave to the extent of the ordinary leave standing to his credit at the date of retirement. Any balance of the period of study leave mentioned above which cannot be so converted will be excluded in reckoning service for pension.

Rule 189: Government servants granted study leave are ordinarily required to meet the cost of fees paid for courses of study. In exceptional cases, the State Government will be prepared to consider proposals that such fees should be paid by Govemment.

Rule 190: On completion of a course of study, a certificate on the proper form which may be obtained from the High Commissioner, together with certificates of examinations passed or of special study, shall, when the study leave has been taken in Europe or America, be forwarded to the High Commissioner. When the study leave has been taken in any other country certificates of examinations passed or of special study, which should show the dates of commencement and termination of the courses with any remarks by the instructor, shall be forwarded to the authority which sanctioned the leave. In the case of definite course of study at a recognised institution, the study allowance will be payable by the High Commissioner or in India, as the case may be, on claims submitted by the Government servant from time to time, supported by proper certificates of attendance. When the programme of study approved under rule 184 does not include, or does not consist entirely of such a course of study, the Government servant shall submit to the High Commissioner or to the authority in India which sanctioned his leave, as the case may be, a diary showing how his time has been spent and a report indicating fully the nature of the methods and operations which have been studied, and including suggestions as to the possibility of applying such methods or operations to India. The sanctioning authority in India will decide whether the diary and report show that the time of the Government servant has beca properly employed, and will determine accordingly for what period the study allowance referred to in rule 187 may be granted.

Rule 191: Study leave will count as service for promotion and pension, but not for leave. It will not affect any leave which may already be due to a Government servant; it will count as extra leave on half average pay and will not be taken into account in reckoning the aggregate amoun of leave on half average pay taken by the Government servant towards the maximum period admissible under these rules. Rule 192: During study leave a Government servant will draw hal average pay as defined in rule 10, subject to the maxim and minima lain down in rules 166 and 167. The rate of exchange applicable to the dover store leave salary (other than that admissible during the first four months of a period of leave on average pay) shall apply to study leave months of a pervernment servant may, subject to the approval of the proper authorities being obtained undertake or commenced Course of study during leave on average pay, and subject to rules 187 and 188 draw study allowance in respect thereof: provided that study allowance is not drawn for an aggregate period exceeding two years (18 months in the case of officers falling under rule 181-A), during the whole of a Government servant's service. This rule applied to military officer in civil employment pr taking leave under these rules.

Rule 193: On an application for study leave in Europe or America being sanctioned by the State Government they should inform the High Commissioner of particulars of the case. It will be necessary for the Govt. servant concerned to place himself in communication with the G High Commissioner, who will arrange any details and issue any letters of introduction that may be required. In all cases in which study leave in any other country is sanctioned the particulars should be reported to the Government of India.

Sub-Section 3: Maternity Leave.

Rule 194: (a) Subject to the conditions hereinafter specified, maternity leave may be granted to a female Government servant by the authority empowered to grant ordinary leave to the Government concerned

(b) The period of leave granted may extend up to the end of three months from the date of its commencement or to the end of six weeks from the date of confinement, whichever is earlier.

(c) Leave salary during such leave shall be equal to pay drawn by the Government servant concerned at the time of taking leave.

(d) Maternity leave may be combined with leave of any other kin but any leave for in continuation of the former may be granted only if the request be supported by a medical certificate.

Note: Regular leave in continuation of maternity leave may also be granted in case of illness of a newly-born baby subject to the femal Government servant producing a medical certificate from the Authorised Medical Attendant to the effect that the condition of the ailing baby warrants mother's personal attention and her presence by the baby's side is absolutel necessary.

(e) Maternity leave shall not be debited against the leave account.

(f) No maternity leave shall be granted to a female Government servant for the third and subsequent issues.

Sub-section (4): Hospital Leave.

Rule 195: (1) Subject to the conditions hereinafter specified, the authority competent to grant ordinary leave may grant hospital leave to Class IV Government servant and such Class III Govt. servant whose duties involve handling of dangerous machinery, explosive materials, poisonous drugs or such other things or the performance of hazardous tasks while under medical treatment for illness or injury, if such illness or injury is directly due to risks incurred in the course of their official duties.

(2) Leave salary during hospital leave shall be equal to either average pay or held average pay as the authority granting it may consider necessary, provided that in the case of a person to whom Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 (Act 8 of 1923) applies, the amount of leave salary payable under this sub-rule shall be reduced by the amount of compensation payable under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the said Act.

(3) The amount of hospital leave which may be granted to a Government servant is limited to three months on average pay in any period of three years. For the purpose of this limit, leave on half average pay counts as half the amount of leave on average pay.

(4) Hospital leave may be combined with leave of any other kind, provided that the total period of leave, after such combination shall not exceed twenty-eight months.

(5) Hospital leave shall not be debited against the leave account.

Explanation: For the purpose of this rule, the fact that the illness or injury is directly due to risks incurred in the course of official duties should be certified by the authority competent to sanction leave after proper verification and the amount of leave shall be such as may be recommended by the Authorised Medical Attendant to be necessary and shall not exceed the maximum laid down in this rule.

Sub-section (5): Sick leave to seaman, etc.

Rule 196: (a) Subject to the conditions hereinafter specified, sick leave may be granted to a Government servant serving as an officer, warrant officer or petty officer on a Government vessel, while undergoing medical treatment either on his vessel, or in hospital, by the authority empowered to grant ordinary leave to the Government servant concerned.

(b) Such leave shall not be granted if a responsible medical officer certificates that the Government servant is malingering or that his ill-health is due to drunkenness or similar self indulgence or to his own action in wilfully causing or aggravating disease or injury.

(c) The period of leave granted shall not exceed six weeks.

(d) Leave salary during such leave shall be equal to the pay drawn by the Govt. servant concerned at the time of taking leave, provided that in the case of a person to whom the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, applies, the amount of leave salary payable under this clause shall be reduced by the amount of compensation payable under section 4 (a) D of the said Act.

(e) Such leave shall not be debited against the leave account.

Rule 197: (a) Subject to the conditions hereinafter specified, sick leave may be granted to a seaman, who is disabled in the exercise of his duty by the authority empowered to grant ordinary leave to the Government

servant concerned. (b) Such leave shall not be granted if the disability was due to the seaman's own carelessness or inexperience. The disability must be certified by a Government medical officer.

(c) The vacancy caused by the seaman's absence on leave must not be filled up.

(d) The period of leave granted shall not exceed three months.

(e) Subject to the proviso contained in clause (d) of rule 196 leave salary during such leave shall be equal to the pay drawn by the seaman concerned at the time of taking leave.

(f) Such leave shall not be debited against the leave account.

ESSENCE OF DIFFERENT KINDS OF LEAVE

1. Earned Leave (E.L.): (i) Up to the 31st December, 1975, E.L. was calculated at the rate of 1/11th of the period spent on duty.

(ii) Under the present system (from 1.1.1976 onwards) a Govemment servant's leave account is credited in advance with 15 days of E.L. on the first of January and 15 days on the first of July every year. In the even years (ending with 2, 4, 6, 8, and 0) advance credit of 16 days is given on the first of July. The leave at the credit of the Govt. servant at the close of the previous half-year is carried forward to the next half-year subject to the condition that the carried forward leave plus the credit for the half-year should not exceed 180 days up to 30.6.1986 and thereafter 240 days.

(iii) From 1.1.1995 onwards, in cases where the E.L. at credit on the 1st January/1st July is 240 days or less but more than 225 days, an advance credit of 15 days is to be made in the leave account showing the balance in excess of 240 days inside a bracket. Leave taken during the current half-year is to be adjusted first against the figure shown in the said bracket.

An illustration is given below:

Illustration

Balance of E.L. in the Leave Account of Shri 'B' as on 30.6.1998 was 229 days E.L. of 15 days availed by him from 12.1.1999 to 26.1.1999.

Particulars

No. of days

Total

Balance B/F as on 30.6.1998

229

Advance credit on 1.7.1998

15

240 + (4)

Advance credit on 1.1.1999

15

240 + (15)

E.L. availed from 12.1.1999 to 26.1.1999 (15 days)

(-)015

240

Notes: 1. While crediting E.L. on 1.7.1998, the number of days in excess of 240 days (4 days) has been shown separately in the bracket. 2. Since no E.L. was availed during the next half-year (1.7.1998 to 31.12.1998), additional credit of 4 days has been shown as lapsed.

3. While crediting E.L. on 1.1.1999, the number of days in excess of 240 days (15 days) has been shown separately in the bracket.

4. E.L. availed (15 days) during the half-year 12.1.1999 to 26.1.1999 has been adjusted from the additional credit of E.L. in the bracket.

(iv) The advance credit of 15 days to be afforded in the Leave Account on 1st January or 1st July should be reduced by 1/10th of the period of extraordinary leave (E.L.O.) if taken during the previous half- year. Such reduction is subject to a maximum of 15 days.

An illustration is given below :

Illustration:

Balance of E.L. at the credit of Sri 'A' as on 31.12.1997                  ..........95 days

He had availed E.O.L. with M.C. for 30 days from 1.11.97. to 30.11.97

v) If a Government servant is appointed during the middle of the half-year, his Leave Account shall be credited at the rate of 21/2 days of each completed calender month of the service which he is likely to render in that particular calender half-year.

An illustration is given below:

Illustration:

(a) Shri 'A' joined service on 25.2.1997

He availed E.L. as follows :-

(1) 18 days from 14.7.1997 to 31.7.1997

(ii) 18 days from 27.12.1997 to 13.1.1998

Notes: 1. E.L. at credit on 27.12.1998 was 7 days only, yet E.L.. could be sanctioned for 18 days taking into account the advance credit to be given on 1.1.1998 (15 days) 2. Though E.L. was granted from 27.12.1997 to 13.1.1998 in one spell, posting in the Leave Account should be made separately for 27.12.1997 to 31.12.1997 and 1.1.1998 to 13.1.1998.

(vi) In the case of a Government servant retiring or resigning during a half-year, his Leave Account shall be credited at the rate of 212 days per completed month in the half-year up to the date of retirement or resignation.

Two illustrations are given below:

Illustration I:

Balance of E.L. in Leave Account of Shri 'D' as on 31.12.1997       -       85 days

He retired from service on          -        
  30.4.1998 (AN)

Note: In the case of retirement as also resignation, completed months up to the last working day should be taken into account for giving advance credit in the Leave Account.

Illustration II:

Balance of E.L. in the Leave Account of Shri 'C' as on 31.12.1997          -          10 days

He resigned on 28.2.1998 Before that the availed E.L. for 15 days from 22.1.1998 to 8.2.1998

Note: The remaining 2 days of E.L. will have to be disallowed.

(vii) The maximum E.L. that can be granted at a time is 120 days.

(2) Unavailed joining time credited to Leave Account as

E.L.: 1. Admissible if any employee on transfer joins the new post without availing himself of the full joining time to which he is entitled.

2. The difference between the eligible joining time limited to 10 days and the number of days actually availed will be credited to his E.L. account.

3. The amount so credited plus the existing credit should not exceed

par 240 days.

No Illustration :

Balance of E.L. as on 31.12.1997                    120 days 
Availed joining time 5 days against the entitlement of 10 days forproceeding alone to the new station in the month of March, 1998.

Note: The credit of unavailed joining time to E.L. account will be adjusted subject to the maximum of 10 days if one of the two prescribed conditions are fulfilled, viz., (i) if the official is specifically ordered to join duty immediately by curtailing the joining time, on (ii) if he proceeds alone to the new place and takes his family thereafter within 6 months.

(3) Additional Earned Leave (15 days): (i) The benefit of

Additional E.L. is admissible to the staff of the Odisha State Guest House/ Utkal Bhawan, Calcutta/Odisha Bhawan, New Delhi/Police personnel/ Fire service personnel/Jail personnel for their work on Sundays/Second Saturdays/Public Holidays.

(ii) Benefit: Additional E.L. for 15 days credited to the Leave Account which is allowed to be surrendered for leave salary and allowance each year.

(4) Surrender of E.L. in lieu of leave salary and allowances: (i) An employee may be allowed to surrender 30 days E.L. once in 24 months' Block Period provided he has not less than 120 days E.L. at his credit.

(ii) The leave salary and allowance admissible for the leave surrendered shall be equivalent to the last pay and allowances drawn.

(iii) Cash payment of leave salary in lieu of surrendered leave was made permissible from 1.4.1996. Prior to that it was being credited to the G.P. Fund Account except in cases of Government servants retiring within 6 months. (iv) The benefit is admissible to all the State Government employees under regular establishments including I.A.S., I.P.S., and I.F.S., officers.

(v) The benefit is not available to suspended employee.

(vi) Authority competent to sanction leave may sanction surrender of E.L.

(vii) Programming of eligible employees is to be made at the beginning of each Block period of 24 months.

(viii) Leave account will be deducted.

(ix) Leave is earned during surrender of leave.

(5) Earned leave in Vacation Department: (For permanent Government servants)

1. If vacation is availed of., E.L. should be reducted as follows:-

(i) Subordinate Judge and Munsifs

15 days

(ii) Other Govemment servants

20 days

If vacation is partly taken, reduction shall be the fraction of 15 days/20 days to the proportion which the part of the vacation

taken bears to the full period of vacation.

3. The total duration of vacation combined within E.L. is limited to 180 days.

4. The total duration of vacation combined with E.L. and Commuted Leave is limited to 240 days.

(Rule 8 of O.L.R.)

(6) Encashment of unutilised leave: 1. The benefit of encashment of unutilised leave is admissible in the following circumstances -

(a) to an employee on his retirement on attaining the age of superannuation;

(b) to an employee on premature retirement;

(c) to an employee on voluntary retirement;

(d) to an employee on his retirement;

(e) to the family in the event of death of a Govt. servant while in service; and

(f) to an employee on resignation or quittal of service

2. Limit for the purpose of encashment: (a) number of days of "E.L." at the credit of the employees on the last day of his service subject to the maximum of 300 days in the following cases :-

(1) retirement on attaining the age of superannuation, and

(i) death while in service

(b) No. of days of E.L.. plus the Half Pay Leave at credit on the last day of his service subject to the maximum of E.L. of 180 days in the following cases:

(1) voluntary retirement;

(1) retirement on invalidation; and

(iii) premature retirement (other than an a measure of punishment)

(c) an employee who resigns or quits the service is entitled to cash equivalent in respect of E.L. to the extent of half of such leave at credit subject to a maximum of 120 days.

3. Amount payable: (i) Leave salary.

*For employee who retired on or after 30.9.2002 vide Finance Department No. 45439/F., Dt. 27.9.2002.

(ii) D.A. appropriate to the leave salary.

(iii) No compensatory allowance or house-rent allowance is payable.

4. The leave encashment benefit should be granted suo motu without waiting for any application from the claimant.

5. The payment of whole or part of the cash equivalent of leave salary may be withheld if, in the opinion of the competent authority, there is a possibility of some money becoming recoverable from the employee on conclusion of disciplinary/criminal proceeding against him or on regularisation of the period of suspension during service. On conclusion of the proceeding or regularisation of the period of suspension, such an employee will become eligible to the amount so withheld after adjustment of Govt. dues, if any.

(7) Half-pay leave: 1. Half-pay Leave Account of an employee is credited with 20 days for every completed year of service, inclusive of periods of leave of all kinds, even period of E.O.L. 2. It can be granted either on medical certificate or on private affairs.

3. It may be granted to a tempory employee provided the sanctioning authority has reason to believe that the employee will return to duty on expiry of half-pay leave.

(Rule 9 of O.L.R.)

AUDIT INSTRUCTION

There is no restriction on an officer at this option being granted half-pay leave even when E.L. is due to him.

(Auditor General's No. 21-A/271-36, Dt. 20.01.1937)

(8) Commuted leave: 1. Commuted leave is granted to an employee who desires to convert half-pay leave into full-pay leave.

2. When commuted leave is granted, twice the amount of such leave is debited against the half-pay leave due.

3. It may be granted to permanent and temporary employees.

4. It may be granted on medical certification.

5. Limits: (i) 240 days during the entire service; and

(ii) total duration of E.L. and commuted leave taken in conjuction should not exceed 240 days.

(9) Leave not due: 1. Leave not due is granted to a permanent employee with no half-pay leave at his credit.

(Rule 9 (3) of O.L.R.)

2. There should be reasonable prospect of the employee returning to duty on its expiry.

3. Limits: (i) 360 days during the entire service period on medical certificate.

(ii) 90 days at a time and 180 days in the entire service period without medical certificate.

(iii) the amount of leave should be limited to the half-pay leave that the employee is likely to earn subsequently.

4. Leave not due is debited against the half-pay leave which the employees may earn subsequently on return to duty. (Rule 10 of O.L.R.)

(10) Extraordinary Leave: (i) Extraordinary leave (E.O.L. or leave without pay) may be granted to a Govt. servant -

(a) when no other leave is admissible; or

(b) when other leave is admissible, but the employee applies in writing for the grant of E.O.L.

(ii) E.O.L. may be granted -

(a) in combination with or in continuation of any kind of leave that is admissible; and

(b) to commute retrospectively periods of absence without leave into

E.O.L.

(iii) The maximum period of continuous absence from duty on leave or on vacation and leave combined, is 28 months; provided that in calculating this maximum, account shall not be taken on leave granted on M.C. or E.O.L. (Rule 13 of Odisha Leave Rules, and rule 160 of the OSC)

(iv) For a temporary employee who has not rendered 3 years continous service, the E.O.L. on any occasion should not exceed the following limits:-

(a) two months;

(b) four months in a case supported by medical certificate;

(c) eighteen months where an employee is undergoing treatment for tuberculosis and leprosy (will not be allowed to an employee who has not rendered one year's service.)

(v) No leave salary is admissible during E.O.L.

(11) Maternity Leave: 1. Maximum limit: 90 days

2. Abortion including miscarriage: 60 days

3. For the third and subsequent issues also Maternity Leave is admissible provided the female Government servant is having less than two surviving children.

4. May be combined with any other leave admissible.

5. Application is to be supported by a certificate from an authorised medical practitioner, and in case of miscarriage/abortion, a certificate from private registered medical practitioner may be accepted.

6. Counts for increment and pension.

7. Leave not debited to the leave Account

8. Full pay admissible.

For Central Government employees.

Paternity leave: 15 days

(12) Leave salary admissible: 1. E.L.: Leave salary equal to the pay drawn immediately before proceeding on E.L.

2. H.P.L.: Leave salary equal to half the amount admissible while on E.L.

3. Commuted leave: Leave salary equal to the amount admissible while on E.L., but double the number of days availed of as leave is debited to the Leave Account.

4. Leave no due: Amount equal to leave salary admissible during the period of H.P.L.

5. E.O.L.: No leave salary admissible.

hi6. Maternity Leave: Full pay

(13) Study Leave: 1. Not to be granted to a subordinate staff except in very exceptional cases.

2. (i) Govt. servants of less than 5 years of service; or

(ii) Government servants within 3 years of the date at which they have the option of retiring; or

(iii) If they have the option of retiring after 20 years' service, within 3 years of the date at which they will complete 25 years' service.

3. Study leave should not exceed 2 years in the whole period of service, nor shall be the total period of study leave in combination with other kinds of leave except leave on M.C. or E.O.L., involve his absence from duty for more than 30 months.

4. For Doctors of Health & Family Welfare Deptt. and Labour & Employment Deptt., the maximum period of study leave allowable is 3 years.

5. Entitled to leave salary, equal to pay and D.A. admissible to him while on duty immediately before proceeding on study leave.

6. Study leave counts for increment.

7. A Bond prescribed for the purpose has to be executed.

8. Not debited in the Leave Account.

(14) Study allowance: 
1. A study allowance is granted to a Government servant who has been granted study leave for studies outside India. The rates of allowance differ from country to country. 
2. Study allowance for the entire period of vacation during the course of study is allowed in specified circumstances.
3. The period for which study allowance may be granted shall not exceed 24 months in all.

(15) Special Disability leave: 1. The leave is granted to an employee who is disabled by injury-

(i) internationally inflicted, or

(ii) caused in or in consequence of performance of official duties or

(ii) caused in consequence of official position.

2. The disability should have been manifested itself within 3 months of the incident. The time limit of 3 months may be relaxed in special cases.

3. Period of leave granted will be such as certified by an Authorised Medical Attendant and subject to a maximum of 24 months.

4. It may be combined with leave of any other kind.

5. It will count as duty in calculating pension.

6. It may be granted more than once if the disability is aggravated or reproduced in similar circumstances at a later date, but the maximum leave granted in consequence of any one disability should not exceed 24 months.

7. Special disability leave is also admissible when an employee is disabled by injury accidentally inflicted.

8. Leave salary: For the first 4 months, leave salary will be equal to leave salary while on earned leave. For the remaining period it will be equal to leave salary admissible during half-pay leave. The Government servant may avail his half-pay simultaneously after 4 months of such special disability leave and get leave salary equal to full pay leave.

9. If the employee is entitled to any benefit under Workmen's Compensation Act, the amount of leave salary will be reduced by the amount of benefit payable under the said Act.

10. The special disability leave is not debited to the Leave Account. (Rules 176 add 177 of Odisha Service Code)

(16) Hospital Leave: 1. Hospital leave is admissible to Class-III and Class-IV employees whose duties involve handling of dangerous machinery, explosive materials, poisonous drugs and the like, or the performance of hazardous tasks while under medical treatment due to risks incurred in the course of official duties.

2. It may be granted on production of a medical certificate from an Authorised Medical Attendant.

3. Maximum limits:

(i) 3 months on average pay in any period of 3 years.

(ii) may be combined with any other leave, the total period not exceeding 28 months.

4. Leave salary is equal to either average pay or half average pay as the sanctioning authority may determine.

5. Where Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, applies, the amount of leave salary will be reduced by the amount of compensation received by him under the provisions of the said Act.

6. Hospital leave is not debited in the Leave Account.

(17) Casual Leave: 1. Admissible up to 10 days in a calender year.

2. In special circumstances, special casual leave of 5 days may be granted in a calendar year.

3. Casual leave combined with special casual leave should not be allowed for more than 10 days at a time.

4. Casual leave is meant to meet emergencies like illness, death of relative, performance of religious rites, etc.

5. Under ordinary circumstances, application for casual leave should be submitted at least 3 days prior to the date from which casual leave is required, unless it necessary for unforeseen reasons, e.g., sudden illness, etc.

6. An employee on casual leave is not treated as absent from duty.

7. Ad hoc employees are entitled to C.L.

(18) Half-day Casual Leave: 1. Effective from 1.8.1994

2. For grant of half-day's C.L., the lunch break is the dividing line, i.e., -

(i) Government servant taking half-day's C.L. for the after-noon session has to come to office at 2 p.m.

(ii) Government servant taking half-day's C.L. for the after-noon session may leave office at 1.30 p.m.

3. Meant for urgent work which does not require a full day's C.L.

4. May be granted in conjuction with full day's C.L.

5. Subject to be maximum limit prescribed for C.L.

(F.D. No. 25/68/F., Dt. 15.07.1994)

(19) Leave Amendment: The State Government have also decided to enhance the existing upper limit of 240 days to 300 days for encashment of unutilised Earned Leave at the credit of an employee at the time of retirement. The additional limit would apply to all employees who retire on or after the 30th September, 2002. The enhance ceiling will.not be applicable in respect of employees who have retired earlier.

(F.D. No. CS-II-32/2002-7531/F., Dt. 19.02.2003)

LEAVE PROCEDURE RULES

SECTION - 1 
LEAVE ACCOUNT

1. The leave account of a Government servant shall be maintained in the Comptroller and Auditor-General's Form No. A.T.C. -2 given in the Annexure or in the Form prescribed in the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966, according as he is subject to the leave rules in Chapter VI of the Odisha Service Code or the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966, as the case may be.

2. (a) The leave account of a Gazetted Government servant shall be maintained by or under the direction of the Accountant-General, Odisha.

(since changed).

(b) The leave account of a non-Gazetted Government servant shall be maintained by the Head of Office in which he is employed.

SECTION-II APPLICATION FOR LEAVE

3. Subject to any special rules or orders issued by the competent authority all applications for leave including extension of leave should be made in the Form prescribed in the Odisha General Financial Rules to the authority competent to grant the leave.

4. A Government servant transferred to foreign service must, before taking up his duties in foreign service, make himself acquainted with the rules and arrangements which will regulate his leave during such service.

5. A Government servant on foreign service in India should submit all applications for leave with the report of the Accountant-General, to the authority competent to sanction the leave through his employer when the employer is not himself competent to do so.

6. Medical Officers must not recommend the grant of leave in any case in which there appears to be no reasonable prospect that the Government servant concerned will ever be fit to resume his duties. In such cases the opinion that the Government servant is permanently unfit for Government service should be recorded in the medical certificate.

7. No recommendation contained in the certificate given by a Medical Board or a Medical Officer shall be evidence of a claim to any leave not admissible to the Government servant under the terms of his contract or of the rule to which he is subject.

8. Before a Gazetted Government servant can be granted leave or an extension of leave on medical certificate, he must obtain a certificate in the following form from the Medical Officer who is his Authorised Medical Attendant under the Odisha Services (Medical Attendance Rules.)

MEDICAL CERTIFICATE FOR GAZETTED OFFICER.

Statement of the case of

Name (to be filled in by the applicant in the presence of the Authorised Medical Attendant)

Appointment

Age

Total Service

Previous periods of leave of absence on medical certificate

Habits

Disease

1 Chief District Medical Officer/ Medical Officer at or of after careful personal examination of the case hereby certify that Shri/ Smt.. ...is in a bad state of health and I solemnly and sincerely declare that amording to the best of my judgement a period of absence from duty is essentially necessary for the recovery of his/her health and recommend that he/she may be granted leave for days with effect from

*In my opinion, it is necessary/not necessary for the officer to appear before a Medical Board.

Date

Chief District Medical Officer/ Medical Officer at or of

*(Score out irrelevant words)

Note 1: This form should be adhered to as closely as possible and should be filled in after the signature of the applicant has been taken. The certifying officer is not at liberty to certify that the applicant requires a change from or to a particular locality or that he is not fit to proceed to a particular locality. Such certificates should only be given at the explicit desire of the administrative authority concerned to whom it is open to decide when an application on such ground has been made to him, whether the applicant should go before a Medical Board to decide the question of his fitness for service.

Note 2: No recommendation contained in this certificate shall be evidence of a claim to any leave not admissible to the Government servant under the terms of his contract or of the rules to which he is subject.

9. Having secured such a certificate, the Govt. servant must, except in cases covered by rule 12 of this Appendix, obtain the permission of the Head of his office or, if he himself is the head of an office, the Head of his department, to appear before a Medical Board. He should then present himself with two copies of the statement of his case before such a Board. The Board will be assembled under the orders of the Director of Health Services, Odisha, who will, where practicable, preside over it. The Board will meet either at the headquarters of the State or at such other place as the State Government may appoint.

10. Before the required leave or extension of leave can be granted, the Government servant must obtain from the Board a certificate to the following effect:

"We do hereby certify that, according to the best of our professional judgement after careful personal examination of the case, we consider the health of to be such as to render leave of absence for a period of days absolutely necessary for his recovery."

11. Before deciding whether to grant or refuse the certificate, the Board may, in a doubtful case, detain the applicant under professional observation for a period not exceeding fourteen days. In that case, it should grant him a certificate to the following effect: having applied to us for a medical certificate recommending the grant to him of leave, we consider it expedient, before granting or refusing such a certificate, to detain under professional observations for days.".

12. (a) The authority competent to sanction leave may dispense with the procedure laid down in rules 9 and 10 of this Appendix:

(i) when the leave recommended by the Authorised Medical Attendant is for period not exceeding 90 days and he certifies that it is unnecessary for the applicant to appear before a Medical Board, or

(ii) when the applicant is undergoing treatment as an indoor patient in a Govt. Hospital and the leave is recommended for the period of hospitalisation or convalescence by -

(1) the Medical Officer in charge of the case not below the rank of an Assistant Professor, in the case of Medical College Hospital, and

(2) the Medical Officer in charge of the Hospital, in other cases:
Provided that in cases governed by clause (2) above when an officer of a higher rank actually attends on the patient, the leave shall be recommended by that Medical Officer.

(b) If the state of applicant's health is certified by the Authorised Medical Attendant to be such as to make it inconvenient for him to present himself at any place in which a Board can be assembled, the said authority may accept such a certificate in lieu of a certificate prescribed in rule 10 of this Appendix:
Provided that where the period of leave recommended exceeds 60 days, the certificate should be countersigned either by the Civil Surgeon of the District or, if the officer is undergoing treatment as an out-door patient in a Medical College Hospital, by the concerned Professor of the College, except where such an officer is himself the Authorised Medical Attendant of the applicant.

13. The grant of a certificate under rule 10 or 12 of this Appendix does not in itself confer upon the Government servant concerned any right to leave. The certificate should be forwarded to the authority competent to grant the leave, and the orders of that authority should be awaited.

14. (a) Every application for leave on medical ground made by a non-Gazetted Government servant other than a Government servant in Class IV shall be accompanied by a medical certificate from a registered medical practitioner or by a request for the issue of requisition for examination by a medical officer of Government. Such certificate should distinctly state the nature of the illness, its symptoms, probable causes and duration, and the period of absence from duty considered to be absolutely necessary for the restoration of the applicant's health.

(b) The authority competent to sanction leave may, at its discretion, secure a second medical opinion by requesting the Chief District Medical Officer of the district or the Medical Officer of the station where a Government servant falls ill to have the applicant medically examined. Should it decide to do so, it must arrange for the second medical examination to be made on the earliest possible date after the date on which the first medical opinion was given.

(c) It will be the duty of the Chief District Medical Officer or the Medical Officer in charge of the Civil Station, as the case may be, to express an opinion both as regards the facts of the illness and as regards the necessity for the amount of the leave recommended and for this purpose he may require the applicant for leave to appear either before himself or before a Medical Officer nominated by himself.

Note: The presentation of a certificate as prescribed in this rule does not in itself confer upon the Govt. servant concerned any right to leave.

15. In support of an application for leave, or for an extension of leave on medical certificate from a non-Gazetted Government servant belonging to a State Civil Service, Class IV or holding a State Civil post. Class IV, the authority competent to grant the leave may accept such certificate as it may deem sufficient.

SECTION III
 GRANT OF LEAVE

16. (a) Except as provided in this rule, no leave may be granted to a Gazetted Govt. servant and a non-Gazetted Govt. servant on foreign service until a report as to the admissibility of leave has been obtained from the Accountant General, Odisha. In the case of leave on average pay or earned leave, the authority competent to sanction leave may calculate the amount of such leave admissible to the officer in respect of the period of duty rendered by him from the date of return from leave on the last occasion and issue provisional sanction to the leave admissible to him without waiting for the report from the Accountant General. On receipt of the sanction, the Accountant General, after necessary verification, will issue the leave salary slip in respect of the leave on average pay of earned leave due and for the rest of the period, if any, request the administrative authority to modify the sanction, if nečessary. In either case, the Accountant General will report on the title to the leave immediately on receipt of the provisional sanction, besides issuing the leave salary slip. [Procedure dispensed with]

(b) Leave may be granted with retrospective effect from the date on which it is admissible.

17. (i) Leave should not be granted to an extent which would unduly deplete the strength of a service of department available for duty. When the duty strength has been reduced to an essential minimum, no further leave of any description should be granted, except in cases of the most absolute necessity. When it is impossible, in the interest of the public service, to grant all applications for leave, the following considerations should be taken into account in deciding which applications should be granted:

a) The Government servants who can, for the time being, best be ( spared, due regard being paid to the facility with which they could, if necessity arose, be recalled from leave;

(b) The amount of leave due to the various applicants;

(c) The amount and character of the service rendered by each applicant since he last returned from leave;

(d) The fact that any such applicant was compulsorily recalled from his last leave; and

(e) The fact that any such applicant has previously been refused leave in the public interest.

(ii) If a If a Government servant applies for leave at short intervals on the score of health, leave should be refused except on medical certificate. In such a case the frequency of the leave taken in past should be brought to the notice of the medical examiners, and they should be asked to advice with special care on the term required to establish a complete recovery.

(iii) 'Notwithstanding the provisions in the preceding clauses, the application for leave preparatory to retirement by a Government servant should normally be allowed as soon as the leave is applied for and the sanction order should not be cancelled subsequently resulting in refusal of leave. Where in the exigencies of public service, it is considered absolutely necessary to refuse leave preparatory to retirement, the matter should be submitted to Govt. with specific reasons well in time for orders.

18. (1) When a medical authority has reported that there is no reasonable prospect that a particular Govt. servant will ever be fit to retum to duty, leave should not necessarily be refused to such Govt. servant. It may be granted, if due, by a competent authority on the following conditions:

(a) If the medical authority is unable to say with certainty that the Government servant will never again be fit for service, leave not exceeding twelve months in all may be granted. Such leave should not be extended without further reference to medical authority.

(b) If a Government servant is declared by a medical authority to be completely and permanently incapacitate for further service, leave or an extension of leave may be granted to him as a special case after the report of the medical authority has been received, provided that the amount of leave as debited against the leave account together with any period of duty beyond the date of the medical authority's report does not exceed six months. Special circumstances justifying such treatment may be held to exist when the Government servant's breakdown in health has been caused in and as a consequence of Government service or when the Government servant has taken a comparatively small amount of leave during his service or will complete at an early date an additional half-year's service for pension.

(2) A Government servant who is declared by a medical authority to be completely and permanently incapacitated for further service shall -

(a) If he is on duty, be invalided from service from the date of relief of his duties, which should be arranged without delay on receipt of the report of medical authority. If, however, he is granted leave under sub-rule (1) above he shall be invalidate from service on the expiry of such leave, and

(b) If he is already on leave, be invalided from service on the expiry of that leave or extension of leave, if any, granted to him under sub-rule (1).

Note: For the purpose of this rule, a competent authority means (1) In respect of non-Gazetted Government servant under the control of a Head of Department ..... .....Head of Department.

(2) In respect of all Gazetted Government servants and non-Gazetted Government servants other than those under the control of the Head of Department............ The Administrative Department of Government.

19. The leave shall not be granted to a Government servant whom a competent punishing authority has decided to dismiss, remove or compulsorily retire from Govemment service.

SECTION-IV DEPARTURE ON LEAVE

20. (a) Unless specially ordered otherwise leave must begin within thirty-five days of the date on which it is granted.

(b) A Govt. servant intending to leave his headquarters station during leave must obtain necessary prior permission of the authority competent to sanction leave except in emergencies and furnish to him the address which will find him during leave.

(c) Every Government servant proceeding on leave out of India should procure from the Audit Officer and take with him a copy of the memorandum of information issued for the guidance of Government servants proceeding on leave out of India. If the leave has been granted on a medical certificate, he must take a copy of the medical statement of his case also.

21. A Government servant taking leave out of India must report his embarkation, through the Audit Officer to the authority which granted his leave in such form as the Auditor General may prescribe.

SECTION-V RETURN FROM LEAVE

22. A Government servant returning from leave is not entitled in the absence of specific orders to that effect, to resume. as a matter of course the post which he held before going on leave. He must report his return to duty and await orders.

23. In the absence of any orders to the contrary, a Gazetted Government servant on return from leave must report his return to the State Government in the Administrative Department and a non-Gazetted Government servant on return from leave must report his return to the authority under whom he was serving before he proceeded on leave.

Note: See also the provisions in rules 140 and 141 of the Odisha Service Code.

SECTION VI LEAVE OUT OF INDIA

24. A Government servant taking leave in the United Kingdom must report his arrival in that country to the High Commissioner for India.

25. In the case of Government servants specially permitted under rule 168 of the Odisha Service Code to draw leave salary out of India, leave salary is issued by the Chief Accounting Officer, High Commissioner for India in the United Kingdom monthly in arrear on the first day of each calendar month.

26. No Government servant can begin to draw leave salary from the Chief Accounting Officer, High Commissioner for India in United Kingdom until he has presented to him a leave salary certificate in such form as Auditor General may prescribe. 27. Payment will be made at the option of the Government servant drawing leave salary by any of the following methods:

(a) To the Government servant himself on his personal application.

(b) To his banker or other agent, duly authorised under power of attorney, on production of a certificate duly filled up and executed. In cases where the banker has guaranteed the High Commissioner against loss consequent upon dispensation with proof of existence, a life certificate is unnecessary.

Note: A supply of life certificate forms may be obtained from the High Commissioner.

(c) To the presenter of a payment form, comprising of a receipt and a life certificate, both duly completed by the Government servant.

Note: If the Government servant intimates to the High Commissioner the election of this method, he will be regularly supplied with the requisite payment form as the due date of issue approaches.

28. A Govt. servant on leave out of India who desires an extension of his leave must submit his application for such extension to the authority which granted the leave, not less than six weeks before the expiry of his leave. An application made within six weeks from such expiry will not be considered unless special reasons for consideration exist.

29. If a Govt. servant on leave out of India desires on grounds other than medical, an extension of leave granted on medical certificate, he should produce a certificate of fitness as required under role 140 of the OSC. Such certificate may be obtained at his option either in India or outside India. If it is obtained in India, it should be in the relevant form and from the appropriate authority as prescribed in these rules of this Appendix. In other cases, it should be from two registered medical practitioners in the following form :

We certify that we have carefully examined A.B. of the Department of the Government of Odisha and find that he is in good health and fit to return to his duty in India.

Date

Place

If the certificate be signed by foreigners, it should be attested by Consular or other authority as bearing the signature of qualified medical practitioners.

30. If an application made under rule 28 of this Appendix is for an extension of leave on medical certificate, it must be accompanied by a certificate from the registered medical practitioners in the following form:
"We hereby certify that we have carefully examined A. B. of the.......... Department of Govt. of Odisha who is suffering from.......... and we solemnly and sincerely declares that according to the best of our judgement and belief, he is at present unfit for duty, and that it is absolutely necessary for the recovery of his health that his present leave which will expire on.......... shall be extended by ........... days.

Date:

Signature of the Medical Practitioner

Place: Note: The certificate must describe in full detail the nature of the disease and the present condition of the Government servant. If it be signed by foreigners, it must be attested by Consular or other authority as bearing signatures of the qualified medical practitioners.

31. A Government servant who is on leave in the United Kingdom, may at his option produce the certificates mentioned in roles 29 and 30 of this Appendix from the Medical Board attached to the High Commissioner. Such certificates need not be attested by the Consular or other authority.

32. A Govt. servant required by or under rule 140 of the Odisha Service Code to produce a medical certificate of fitness before returning to duty, must obtain permission to return to duty before so returning.

33. Permission to return cannot be granted to a Government servant to whom no leave salary certificate has been issued or who has exchanged his leave-salary certificate for a warrant before leaving India until he produces a certificate of leave issued by the Accountant General.

34. Before returning to duty, a Government servant on leave in Europe must obtain a last pay certificate from the High Commissioner. A last pay certificate cannot be granted to a Government servant to whom no leave-salary certificate has been issued unless he produces a certificate of leave issued by the Accountant General. A Govt. servant who has drawn his leave salary on a warrant must, on return to India, deliver to the Audit Officer his copy of the warrant, which will serve as a last pay certificate.

CALCULATION OF LEAVE

Example - 1:

Calculation of Earned Leave:

Upto 31.12.96          226

Availed EL 7 days from          1.9.97 to 7.9.97

Surrendered during May' 98 30 days Availed EL from 7.5.1999 to 16.5.1999 Calculate the balance on          1.7.2000

Note: Balance to be exhibited in column (7) of Leave Account form.

Example - 2:

Contributions payable during foreign Service:

(A) Pension Contribution:

A Government servant (Group B) who entered service on 1.7.1986 was drawing pay of Rs. 9,100 p.m. with effect from 1.5.2000 with the date of next increment on 1.9.2000 in the scale of Rs. 8,000-13,500 was sent on foreign service with effect from 1.6.2000. He was given proforma promotion to a post in the scale Rs. 9,350-325-14-550 with effect from 1.10.2000. The officer opted for the scale of his grade plus 20% deputation allowance. Availed leave from 1.11.2000 to 30.11.2000.

Pension contribution payable by the foreign employer.

Date of entry into service          1.7.1986

Period of foreign service          1.6.2000 to 31.12.2000

Leave during foreign service          1.11.2000 to 30.11.2000

Total amount of contribution Rs. 10,804/-

(B) A Govt. servant drawing pay of Rs. 5,600 in the scale of Rs. 5,000-150-8,000, with effect from 1.7.99 is transferred on foreign service terms to a post under B.D.A with effect from 1.1.2000. During foreign service he is to get his grade pay plus 20% as special pay limited to a maximum of Rs. 250/. He is governed by the Orissa Leave Rules, 1966. Leave salary contribution is to be calculated upto 31.7.2000.

Rates of contribution are rounded off.

Example - 3:

Encashment of Leave as on 31.1.2000:

(i) On retirement or on death while in service.

Pay Rs. 4500 + DA Rs. 400 + HRA Rs. 225

Earned leave at credit 185 days Cash equivalent, 4500 + 400/300185 30217

Note: H.R.A. not to be included.

(ii) One resigning/quitting service.

Pay Rs. 5900 + D.A. 944 + HRA Rs. 295

Eamed Leave at credit, 186 days

Entitled to encashment, 93 day

(Equal to half of the E.L. at credit subject to maximum of 120 days)

Cash equivalent 5900 + 944/30×93 - Rs. 21,216.40

Encashment of Leave:

(a) For earned leave Pay + D.A. admissible on the date of cessation of service/30 ×          No. of days of unutilised earned subject to a maximum of 240 days.

(i) On retirement or on death while in service pay Rs. 8100/- + D.A. Rs. 2592 + HRA Rs. 1215/- Earned leave at credit 195 days cash equivalent
8100 + 2592/30 × 195 = Rs. 69,498/-

(ii) On termination of office by the Official Pay Rs. 5600/- + DA 1792/- + HRA 840/-
E.L. at credit 200 days entitled for encashment equal to half of E.L. at credit subject to a maximum of 120 days cash equivalent
5600 + 1792/30 × = Rs. 24,649/-

(b) For half pay leave salary + DA if admissible minus Pension equivalent of Retirement gratuity and relief on pension

30

30

X no of days of half pay leave due on the date of retirement. Date of Superannuation 20.4.99, qualifying service 26 years.

Pay last drawal Rs. 11,300/- (DA 32% of pay) Pension Rs. 4452/- PEG Rs. 1358, P Dearness Relief 32% leave at credit E.L. 180 days HPL 120 days calculation.

[5650(LS)+1808(DA)]-[Rs. 1358 (PEG)+1425 (OR)]/30 × 129 = Rs. 892/-

THE ODISHA EDUCATION (LEAVE OF THE STAFF OF AIDED EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS) RULES, 1977

SECTION - I PRELIMINARY

1. Short title and Commencement: (1) These rules may be called The Odisha Education (Leave of Teachers and other Members of the Staff of Aided Educational Institutions) Rules, 1977.

(2) They shall come into force on such date as Government may be order appoint in that behalf:

Provided that it shall be within the competence of the Govt. to appoint different dates in respect of different categories of Aided Educational Institution. 

2. Definitions: (1) In these Rules, unless the context otherwise requires -

(a) "Act" means the Odisha Education Act, 15 of 1969;

(b) "Board" means the Board of Secondary Education constituted under Section 3 of the Odisha Secondary Education Act, 1952 (Odisha Act 10 of 1953);

(c) "Director" means the Director of Public Instruction and includes such other officer as Government may from time to time notify:

 Provided that when there is more than one Director of Public Instruction or when it is decided by Government than an Officer shall be notified as the Director for the purposes of these rules, it shall be competent for Government to specify the categories of institution in respect of which such officer shall function as the Director;

(d) "Employee" means teachers of Aided Educational Institutions and includes other members of the staff of such institutions;

(e) "Government" means the Govt. of Odisha in the Education Department;

(f) "Inspector" means the Inspector of Schools in charge of an Educational Circle;

(g) "Institution" means an educational institution as defined in Section 3(e) of the Act. (h) "Section" means a section of the Odisha Education Act, 1969;

(2) All words and expression used in these rules but not defined therein shall have the same meaning as are assigned to them in the Act. to them in the Act.

SECTION - II

3. Leave cannot be claimed as matter or right. When the exigencies of work so require discretion to refuse or revoke or curtail leave is reserved to the authority competent to grant it.

4. Except as otherwise provided the various kinds of leave admissible under these rules may be granted in combination with or in continuation of any other kinds of leave.

5. (1) Except as otherwise provided in these rules -

(i) Leave begins on the day on which transfer of charge is effected or if charge is transferred afternoon, on the following day; and

(ii) Leave ends on the day on which charge is resumed or if charge is resumed before noon on the preceding day.

(2) When an employee is permitted to prefix holidays to leave his leave ends on the first day after the holiday.

(3) When an employee is permitted to suffix holidays to leave his leave begins on the day on which it would have ended if the holidays had not been suffixed.

(4) When an employee is permitted under Rule 6 to combine leave with vacation, his leave begins or ends on the day on which it would have begun or ended if had not been combined with vacation.

6. An employee may be permitted to combine vacation with leave either at the beginning or at the end thereof provided that -

(i) no additional expenses shall be incurred by the institution for the period of the vacation;

(ii) vacation shall not be both prefixed and suffixed; to leave.

(iii) leave shall not be both prefixed and suffixed to vacation;

(iv) the total duration of vacation and earned leave taken in conduction shall not exceed two hundred and eighty days.

(v) the duration of vacation and earned leave and commuted leave taken in conduction shall not exceed one hundred and forty days.

7. An employee who remains absent after the end of his leave is not entitled to leave salary for the period of such absence, and that period will be debited against his leave account as though it were leave on half average erage pay, unless his leave is extended by the competent authority: Wilful absence form duty after expiry of leave may be treated as misconduct involving disciplinary action.

8. An employee on leave is prohibited from taking any service or accepting any employment without obtaining the previous sanction of the appointing authority.

SECTION - III

9. Earned Leave: (1) The earned leave admissible to an employee who hold a post substantively one eleventh of the period spent on duty.

(2) The earned leave admissible to an employee is subject to the following conditions, namely:

(i) for each year of duty in which an employee has availed himself of the vacation, his earned leave shall be reduced by twenty days when the entire vacation has been enjoyed :

(ii) if a part of the vacation has been enjoyed in any year, the period by which the earned leave shall be reduced shall be a fraction of twenty days equal to the promotion which the part of the vacation taken, bears to be full period of vacation.

(3) An employee shall cease to earn lease when the earned leave due amount to two hundred and forty days.

(Notfn. No. 25413-XT Codes - 7/91-6, Dt. 16.5.1991)

(4) The maximum earned leave that will be granted to an employee at a time shall be one hundred and twenty days.

(5) An employee who does not hold a post substantively shall not earn any leave during the first year of his service and shall earn it thereafter at one eleventh of the period spent on duty. If, however he had availed of the entire-vacation he shall not earn any leave, but when he has availed vacation, the reduction shall be made proportionately as provided in Sub-rule (2). In no case he shall earn further leave when the leave at his credit amounts to ninety days.

Explanation (1) A person who has completed his probation satisfactory will be deemed to hold the post to which he was appointed on a substantive basis, with effect from the date of completion of period of probation, provided that the period of probation will not be less than one year in any case.

Explanation - (2) For the purpose of this rule vacation counts as duty.

10. Half-pay Leave: (1) Half-pay leave admissible to an employee in respect of each completed year of service shall be twenty days.

(2) The half-pay leave due may be granted to an employee either on medical grounds or on private affairs:

Provided that no half pay leave may be granted to an employee without a substantive appointment, unless the authority competent to sanction leave has reason to believe that the employee will return to duty on its expiry.

11. Commuted Leave: (1) At his option, an employee may have the half-pay leave duty to his credit converted into half the amount of full pay leave when such leave is granted on medical certificate. Such converted leave shall be called commuted leave and maximum limit up to which the commuted leave may be granted during the entire service is two hundred and forty days.

(2) Commuted leave may be combined with earned leave but such combination shall be limited to two hundred and forty days. This limit also applied to the combination of earned leave, vacation and commuted leave provided that no commuted leave may be granted when there is no reasonable prospect of the employee returning to duty on its expiry.

12. Extraordinary leave: (1) Extraordinary leave may be granted to an employee in special circumstances -

(1) when no other leave is by rule, admissible; or

(ii) when other leave is admissible, but the employee concemed applies for the grant of extraordinary leave.

(2) Except in the case of an employee with a substantive appointment who has rendered not less than three years continuous service, the duration of extraordinary leave on any one occasion shall not exceed the following limits -

(1) two months; or

(ii) for months in special cases where the sanctioning authority is satisfied that the absence is due to illness of the employee; or

(iii) eighteen months in the case of an employee undergoing treatment for tuberculosis or leprosy supported by a medical certificate :
Provided that the concession in Clause (iii) above will be admissible only to those employees who have been in continuous service for a period exceeding on year.

(3) An employee who does not hold a post substantively may be granted during deputation on training, extraordinary leave from the date of his relief till the date of resumption of duty on return from training provided that he has completed a minimum period of one year's continuous service on the date of deputation, and the authority competent to grant the leave is satisfied that such training is necessary for improving the professional knowledge of the employee.

(4) Where an employee without any substantive appointment fails to resume duty on the expiry of the period of extraordinary leave granted to him, he shall, unless the appointing authority in view of the exceptional circumstances of the case otherwise determines, be deemed to have resigned his appointments and shall accordingly cease to be in employment.

(5) Extraordinary leave taken on account of illness or for any reason beyond the employee's control or for prosecuting higher scientific or technical studies may be allowed to count for increments:

(Added by S.R.O. No. 1229/84, Dt. 18.9.1984)

Provided that when extraordinary leave is sanctioned in favour of an employee for the purpose of study such employee shall on return from leave produce satisfactory in the form of a degree, diploma or other qualification or in the form of a certificate from the head of the institute where the course of study had been prosecuted to show that he has profited from such study, failing which the order allowing the period of extraordinary leave to account for increments shall be revoked by the authority.

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the aforesaid sub-rules, when Government are satisfied that the operation of any of the provisions of the said Sub-rules causes under hardship to the employee or employees in any particular case it may be an order for the reasons to be recorded in writing, dispense with or relax the requirements of that rule to such extent and subject to such conditions as it may consider necessary for dealing with the case in just and equitable manner.

(Inserted vide Notfn. No. 2162 EYS Dt. 14.1.1986)

13. Study leave: (1) Study leave may be granted to a teacher of Aided College to enable him study scientific, technical or similar problems or to undergo a special course of instructiori such leave is not debited against the leave account.

(2) Study leave will not ordinarily be granted to a teacher of an Aided College of less than five years service or to a teacher within three years of the date on which he will attain the age of compulsory retirement.

(3) The grant of study leave will be made with a regard to the interest of the college. In no case will the grant of this leave in combination with leave other than extraordinary leave or leave on medical certificate involve an absence or over thirty months during the whole period of his service nor will it be granted with such frequency as to remove him from contract with his regular work or to cause difficulties owing to absence on leave.

(4) Study leave sanctioned in favour of a teacher of an Aided College will be limited to the actual period required for the completion of the courses of study. If the courses of study involves a period less than the period of study leave sanctioned the excess period of leave will be treated to absence from study unless he produces the assent of the sanctioning authority to his taking it as ordinary leave.

(5) Study leave will count as services for all purposes but shall not be set against any which may be due to a teacher of an Aided College.

(6) During study leave a teacher of an Aided College shall be entitled to leave salary at the rate admissible to the counterpart in Government College only for a maximum period of two years.

(Inserted vide No. 7050-XIVE/Codes-69/87 EYS, Dt. 19.2.1988)

14. Maternity leave (1) Maternity leave may be granted to a married female employee by the authority empowered to grant ordinary leave subject to the following conditions -

(i) the period of such leave not extend beyond ninety days from the date of commencement. (Substituted S.R.O. 1229/84 Dt. 18.9.1984)

(ii) No maternity leave shall be granted to a female employee for the third and subsequent issue.

(Inserted by S.R.O. No. 868, 86, Dt. 1.10.1986)

(2) Maternity leave may be combined with leave of any other kind due up to a maximum of sixty days. (Substituted by ibid.)

(3) Leave salary during the maternity leave shall be equal to the pay drawn by the employee concerned at the time of taking leave.

Note I- Maternity leave may also be granted in case of miscarriage including abortion subject to the condition that the leave does not exceed six weeks and the application is supported by a certificate from the Medical Attendant.

Note II - The expression "obtain" in Note I shall include an abortion induced under the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971.

(S.R.O. No. 1226/84., Dt. 28.09.984)

15. Earned leave at the credit of an employee shall lapse on the date of compulsory retirement, provided that if in sufficient time before that date, he has -

(i) formally applied for leave due as preparatory to retirement which has been refused; or

(ii) ascertained in writing from the sanctioning authority that such leave applied for would not be granted, in either case the ground of refusal being the requirement of service to the institution after paying due regard to the provisions in Sub-rule (3) of Rule 16, then he may be granted, after the date of retirement, the amount of leave so refused, subject to a maximum of one hundred and eighty days.

16. (1) Leave will not be granted to an extent which would unduly deplete the strength of the establishment available for duty.

When the duty strength has been reduced to an essential minimum. No further leave of any description will be granted except in cases of absolute necessity. When it is impossible, in the interest of the institutions to grant all applications for leave the following consideration should be taken into account in deciding which applications should be granted -

(a) the employee who can, for the time being, best be spared due regarding being paid to the facility with which they could, if necessity arose, be recalled from leave:

(b) the amount of leave due to the various applications;

(c) the amount and nature of the service rendered by each applicant since he last returned from leave; and

(d) the fact they any such applicant has previously been refused leave in the interest of the institution.

(2) If an employee applies for leave at short on the ground of health, leave should be refused except on medical certificate. In such a case of frequency of the leave taken in the past should be brought to the notice of the medical examiner and he should be asked to advice with special care on the term required to establish a complete recovery.

(3) Notwithstanding the provisions in the preceding Sub-rules, the application for leave preparatory to retirement by an employee should normally be allowed as soon as leave is applied for and the sanction order should not be cancelled subsequently resulting in refusal of leave.

17. (1) Except as provided in Sub-rule (2) an employee on eamed leave is entitled to leave salary equal to the average monthly pay earned during the ten complete months immediately preceding the month in which the leave commences, or the substantive pay to which employee is entitled immediately before the commencement of the leave whichever is greater.

(2) An employee who proceeds on earned leave from the post having a scale of pay with a maximum not exceeding Rs. 100/- per month is entitled to lease salary equal to the pay drawn immediately before proceeding on leave.

(3) An employee on half-pay leave is entitled to leave salary equal to half the amount specified in Sub-rule (1) or Sub-rule (2) as the case may be.

(4) An employee on commuted leave is entitled to leave salary equal to the amount admissible under Sub-rule (2), as the case may be.

(5) An employee on extraordinary leave is not entitled to any leave salary.

18. (1) Casual leave with full pay for then days and special casual leave for five days on expiry of the above period may be granted to an employee in any one calendar year. It may be granted in combination with gazetted holidays but subject to the condition mentioned in Clause (iii) of Sub-rule (2), such, holidays will be counted as part of the leave for the purpose of reckoning the total amount of casual leave and special casual leave. The unspent balance of casual leave and special casual leave in any calendar year will lapse at the end of the year.

(2) The grant of casual leave and special casual leave is subject to the following conditions, namely:

(i) casual leave shall not be granted on vague and general grounds, as for 'urgent affairs' or for certain ceremony'. The specific purpose for which leave is required must be stated definitely;

(ii) no employee may be allowed to proceed to casual leave or special casual leave at short intervals;

(iii) casual leave or casual leave combined with special casual leave or casual leave combined with gazetted holidays shall not be allowed for more than ten days at a time; and

(iv) casual leave shall not be granted so as to cause an evasion of rules regarding charge of office commencement and end of leave and return to the duty.

(3) Notwithstanding the provision in the foregoing Sub-rules additional casual leave, with full pay may be granted for the following purposes and too the extent indicated below, namely:

(i) for service on a jury or fur attending approved conferences or University or Board meeting for the minimum period considered necessary; and

(ii) for undergoing sterilization operation for a period not exceeding six days for men and fourteen days for women.

(4) Applications for casual leave and special leave showing reasons for the leave shall be addressed to the authority competent to sanction it and should under ordinary circumstances be made at least three days in advance prior of the date from which casual leave is required except on grounds of personal illness or other emergent and unforeseen causes,

19. Quarantine leave on full pay be granted to an employee who is prevented from attending duty on account of presence of infectious disease in his house at the headquarters. Such leave may be granted upto thirty days by the authority competent to grant regular leave on the basis of a Medical Certificate. For this purpose only Cholera, Small Pox, Plague, Diptheria, Thphus fever and Cerebrospinal Meningitis shall be considered as infectious disease.

20. Leave other than casual leave and special casual leave may ordinarily be granted to an employee of Secondary Schools by the Managing Committee or the Governing Body, as the case may be. In case of urgency or during a vacation when the Managing Committee or the Governing Body will not meet for some time, leave may be granted by the President but any leave so granted should be reported to the Managing Committee or Governing Body, as the case may be, as its next meeting for approval Provided that study leave under Rule 13 may be granted to a teacher of an Aided College only with the prior approval of Government.

(Added by Notfn. No. 7050 XIVE/Codes - 69/87 EYS Dt. 19.2.1988)

21. (1) Casual leave and special casual leave referred to in Sub-rules (1) and (2) of Rule 18 will be granted -

(i) by the President of the Managing Committee or the Governing Body, to the Headmasters respectively;

(ii) by the Headmaster, in the case of other employees of the Secondary Schools respectively.

(2) Special casual leave referred to in Sub-rule (3) of Rule 18 will be sanctioned by authority referred to in Rule 20.

22. (1) A leave account in respect on earned leave, half-pay leave, commuted leave and extraordinary leave, may be maintained in respect of all employees of the Aided Educational institutions in the Form shown in Appendix - A.

(2) A leave account for casual leave and special casual leave referred to Sub-rules (1) and (2) of Rule 18 may be maintained in the Form shown in Appendix - B.

(3) The leave account maintained in an institution shall be subject to inspection by an officer -
not below the rank of an Inspector of Schools in respect of High School; and

23. If any question arises relating to the interpretation of these rules it should be referred to Government for decision.

Note 2 The entries in Cols. 10 and 11 should indicate only the beginning and end of completed years of service at the time of half pay leave commences in cases where an employee completes another year of service while on half-pay leave the extra credit should be shown in Cols. 10 to 14 making suitable additional entries and this should be taken into account when completing Col. 23.

Note 3 When the rate of earning leave changes, the fraction of the earned leave accumulated at the earlier rate should be rounded off the nearest day, i.e. fraction below half should be ignored and those of half of more should be reckoned as a day.

Note 4 In calculating 'earned leave' the actual number of day of duty performed should first be counted and then multiplied by 1/11 or 1/12 as the case may be, the product expressed in day (and a fraction of a day) and limited to 180 or 90, as the case may be.

Note 5 - The deduction of earned leave under Rule 10(i) should be recorded in red ink as minus entry in Column 4.

APPENDIX - B

(Vide Rule 22)

FORM OF LEAVE ACCOUNT FOR CASUAL LEAVE AND SPECIAL CASUAL LEAVE

Name and designation of the employee.

UNAUTHORISED ABSENCE OF GOVT. SERVANT

A Govemment servant is required to attend to his work regularly and in time.
He may, however, remain absent from duties if the competent authority grants leave applied for by him.

Types of leave

The various types of leave that may be sanctioned under the Leave

Rules are as follows :-
1. Earned Leave;          2. Half-pay Leave;

3. Commuted Leave;          4. Leave Not Due;

5. Extraordinary Leave;          6. Maternity Leave;

7. Paternity Leave;          8. Special Disability Leave;

9. Hospital Leave;          10. Seamen's Sick Leave;

11. Study Leave;          12. Departmental Leave;

13. Casual Leave; and          14. Special Casual Leave.

Right to leave Scope not unlimited

Leave cannot be claimed as a matter of right. Rule 7 of CCS (Leave) Rules, 1972, provides as follows:-

(1) Leave cannot be claimed as of right.

(2) When the exigencies of public service so require, leave of any kind may be refused or revoked by the authority competent to grant it

Right to refuse leave - Scope cannot also be unlimited

Although it has not been provided in the Leave Rules in clear and specific terms, leave applied for by a Govt. servant cannot be refused whimsically without taking the facts and circumstances of the case.

Absence without sanctioned leave may lead to penal consequences

If a Govt. servant remains absent without sanctioned leave or remains absent after the expiry of the period covered by the sanctioned leave, disciplinary action may be taken against him which may end in imposition of penalty including dismissal from service.

Absence from duty without any authority Provisions of F.R.

F.R. 17 lays down as follows:

"(1) Subject to any exceptions specifically made in these rules an officer shall begin to draw the pay and allowances attached to his tenure of a post with effect from the date when he assumes the duties of that post, and shall cease to draw them as soon as he ceases to discharge those duties:

Provided that an officer who is absent from duty without any authority shall not be entitled to any pay and allowances during the period of such absence.

Pensionary benefits may also be forfeited

Wilful absence without leave where it stands singly and not in continuation of any authorised leave of absence constitutes an interruption of service for the purpose of pension and unless the Pension sanctioning authority exercise its power under Rule 27 of CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, to treat the period as leave without allowance, the entire past service stands forfeited. [Vide C. & A.G's U.O. No. 1947-A/438-58, dtd. 12th September, 1958]

Instances of unauthorised absence

(i) Shri 'A' remained absent from duty from 7th March 2007 to 9th March, 2007 (three days) without sanctioned leave.

(ii) Shri 'B' was granted Earned Leave for 31 days from 1st March 2007 to 31st March, 2007. He joined duties on 9th, April, 2007. The period of overstayed of leave from 1st April, 2007 to 9th April, 2007 was to be treated as unauthorised absence.

(iii) After the detection of shortage of cash, Shri 'C', Cashier, absconded and his whereabouts were not known from 15 January, 2007.

(iv) Shri 'D' remained absent continuously for a period exceeding five years.

(v) Shri 'E' joined the illegal strike held on 5th August, 2007.

Absence without leave under compelling circumstances

All cases of absence without sanctioned leave cannot be classified as unauthorised absence leading to penal action. There may be extraordinary circumstances wherein a Govt. servant may be compelled to remain absent from duty without sanctioned leave meriting relaxation of the term "unauthorised absence". Some such instances are given below :-

1. At about 9 a.m. of 10th April, 2007, Shri 'AA' suddenly felt chest pain. He was removed to Hospital for medical check-up and treatment. After being released from the Hospital, he joined duties on 14th April, 2007, and applied for sanction of leave.

No penal action can be taken against him for unauthorised absence from 10th April 2007 to 13th April, 2007.

2. On 19th July, 2007, at about 8 p.m. Shri 'BB' received a telegram carrying the news that his father had expired. Shri 'BB' at once rushed to his village for taking the dead body of his father to the burning night. Shri 'BB' appeared before his superior officer on 23rd July, 2007, with an application for grant of Earned Leave for 30 days from 20th July, 2007.

His absence from 20th July, 2007 to 22nd July, 2007 cannot be treated as unauthorised absence.

As per the settled law, before arriving at the decision that the absence of a Government servant was unauthorised deserving penal action, the facts and circumstances of the case have to be carefully looked into.

GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS - SANCTION OF LEAVE AND GUIDELINES FOR TAKING ACTION AGAINST AN UNAUTHORISED ABSENTEE

Grant of leave Government of India's instructions

A suggestion has been made to the Government that as one of the institutional mechanisms to allow Govt. servants to periodically free themselves from the routine stresses of service life and thus help them avoid falling prey to various stress related diseases, they may be compelled to avail of at least 15 days earned leave during a calendar year. Though implementation of the suggestion in this manner is not feasible on account of the provisions of service rules, the basic idea underlying the suggestion is un-expetionable.

2. Under the extant provisions of CCS (Leave) Rules, 1972, leave cannot be claimed as a matter of right. When the exigencies of the public service so require, discretion to refuse or revoke leave of any description is reserved to the authority empowered to grant it. However, as emphasised in the instructions issued by this Department from time to time, such provisions have been made in the Rules because it is not possible to let all those who want leave at a particular time to have it at that time and there is a limit beyond which depletion of staff cannot be permitted without dislocating the working of an establishment. These instructions are not intended to be used as in effect to abridge the leave entitlements of the staff. It is indeed desirable in the interest of the public services that Government servants take leave at suitable intervals and return to work relaxed and refreshed. It has also been laid down that the leave sanctioning authorities may encourage Government servants to take leave periodically, preferably annually, and in case where all applications for leave cannot, in the interest of public service, be granted at the same time, the leave sanctioning authority should draw up phased programme for the grant of lave to the applicants by turn and with due regard to the principles enunciated. Leave is, accordingly, not to be ordinarily denied to any employee, especially in the last 10 years of his career.

3. Periodical availment of leave Is hi the interest of Government as well as the Government servants.

[GI., Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (D.o.P.&T.) O.M. No. 14028/3/2000-Estt. (1) dtd. 22nd/27th March, 2001]

Earned Leave not to be denied during the last ten years of service

The undersigned is directed to say that Rule 7 of the CCS (Leave) Rules, 1972, provides that leave cannot be claimed as of right. When the exigencies of public service so require, discretion to refuse or revoke leave of any description Is reserved to the authority empowered to grant it. These provisions have been made in the rules because it is not always possible to all who want leave at a particular time to have it at that time and there is a limit beyond which depletion of staff cannot be permitted without dislocating the working of an establishment. These provisions are, however, not intended to be used as in effect, to abridge the leave entitlement of the staff. Indeed, it is desirable in the interest of efficiency of public service that Government servants take earned leave at suitable intervals and return to work keen and refreshed.

2. The position has been reviewed by the Government in the light of the recommendation of the Fourth Pay Commission regarding increase in ceiling of earned leave accumulations from 180 days to 240 days. While accepting the recommendation, the Cabinet have also observed that eamed leave should not ordinarily be denied to any employee, especially in the last ten years of his career, so that earned leave accumulations beyond 180 days (now 300 days) normally do not take place. The leave sanctioning authorities are, therefore, requested to ensure that the earned leave is not ordinarily denied to an employee.

[Govt. of India, D.o.P.&T., O.M. No. 14028/19/86-Estt. (Leave), dated the 29th September, 1986]

Unauthorised absence from duty or over-stay of leave-Guidellnes of action to be taken

The following decisions have been taken in consultation with the Department of Personnel and the Ministryof Finance:

(i) When a temporary Government servant asks for leave in excess of the limits prescribed and if the circumstances are exceptional, a decision could be taken by the leave sanctioning authority to grant further leave in excess of the limits in consultation with the Ministry of Finance. Such cases should be referred to the Directorate.

(ii) When a temporary Government servant applies for leave beyond the prescribed limit of extraordinary leave and the leave sanctioning authority is not satisfied with the genuineness of the grounds on which further leave has been asked for, nor does. It consider the grounds as exceptional, the leave cannot be granted. In such a case, the Government servant should be asked to rejoin duty within a specified date, failing which he would render himself liable for disciplinary action. Disobedience of orders to rejoin duty within the specified period would afford good and sufficient reasons for initiating disciplinary action under CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965. If he rejoins duty by the stipulated date, he may be taken back in service and the period of absence not covered by leave to be treated as overstayal of leave and dealt with In accordance with the orders regarding regularisation of overstayal of leave.

If the Government servant does not join duty by the stipulated date, it would be open to the disciplinary authority to institute disciplinary proceedings against him. If during the course of disciplinary proceedings he come for rejoining duty, he should be allowed to do so without prejudice to the disciplinary action already initiated against him (unless he is placed under suspension) and the disciplinary action concluded as quickly as possible. The question of regularisation of the period of overstayal of leave be left over for consideration till the finalisation of the disciplinary proceedings.

(iii) If a Government servant absents himself abruptly or applies for leave which is reused in the exigencies of service and stili he happens to absent himself from duty, he should be told of the consequences, viz., that the entire period of absence would be treated as unauthorized entailing loss of pay for the period in question under proviso to F.R. 17(1) thereby resulting in break in service.

If, however, he reports for duty before or after Initiation of disciplinary proceedings, he may be taken back for duty because he has not been placed under suspension. The disciplinary action may be concluded and the period of absence treated as unauthorised resulting in loss in pay and allowances for the period of absence under proviso to F.R. 17(1) and thus a break in service. The question whether the break should be condoned or not and treated as dies non should be considered only after conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings and that too after the Government servant represents in this regard.

It is made clear that a Govt. servant who remains absent unauthorizedly without proper permission should be proceeded against immediately and this should not be put off till the absence exceeds the limit prescribed in Rule 32 (2) (a) of the CCS (leave) Rules, 1972. However, the disciplinary authority should consider the grounds adduced by the Govt. servant for his unauthorised absence before initiating disciplinary proceedings. If the disciplinary authority is satisfied that the grounds adduced for unauthorised absence are justified, the leave of the kind applied for and due and admissible may be granted to him.

[D.G.P &T's letter No. 6/28/70-Disc.1 (SPBI), dt. 15th October, 1975]

Absence after expiry of leave-Provisions of Leave Rules

Rule 25 of the CCS (Leave) Rules, 1972, lays down as follows:

"(1) Unless the authority competent to grant leave extend the leave, a Government servant who remains absent after the end of leave is entitled to no leave salary for the period of such absence and that period shall be debited against his Leave account as though it were half pay leave, to the extent such, leave is due; the period in excess of such leave due being treated as extraordinary leave.

(2) Wilful absence from duty after the expiry of leave renders a Government servant liable to disciplinary action."

Overstayal of leave - Government's order

Doubts were raised in certain quarters as to how the cases in which an official overstays the prescribed quantum of extraordinary leave should be dealt with. The matter has been considered in consultation with the Department of Personnel and the Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Expenditure. It has been clarified that the amendment does not take away the power of the disciplinary authority to take appropriate disciplinary action for any misconduct and impose one of the penalties under the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965. Action can, therefore, be taken under these rules for unauthorised absence from duty or overstayal of leave even for one day, treating it is misconduct, if the facts and circumstances of the case warrant such an action.

[D.G. P.& T's letter No. 6/28/Disc-l, dated 10.02.1972.]

CASE LAW

Condonation of break-in-service

Break having been condoned it ceased to exist and, therefore, service became continuous - When there is leave without pay, there cannot be any question of discontinuation of service or reappointment. It is a continuity in service for all purposes including question of seniority.

It is no doubt true that there was a clear break in service and, therefore, the appointment thereafter was a fresh appointment. But the Government having reconsidered the whole question as a result of representation made by the affected persons, decided to give the continuity in service which means that the services continued as if there was no break at all. The break having been condoned it ceased to exist and, therefore, the services became continuous. The Government was aware of the situation and, therefore, to avoid the liability for payment of salary for the break period, it also provided for the break period to be treated as leave without pay, where there is a leave without pay, there cannot be any question of discontinuation of service or re-appointment. It is a continuity in service for all purposes including the question of seniority.

[Gopal T. Madnani v. State of Gujarat (1985) 2 SLJ 552 (Guj)] Action to be taken for late coming when no casual leave at credit of the Government servant

The existing instructions provide for deducting half-a-day's casual leave when a Government servant comes late without sufficient justification and the competent authority, which not considering it as a fit case for initiating disciplinary action, is also not prepared to condone the late- coming. Sometimes it also happens that a Government servant who comes late without sufficient justification has no casual leave to his credit and it is not, therefore, possible to debit half-a-days's casual leave, to his casual leave account. The question has, therefore, been raised by many Ministries and Departments, as to how such a situation is to be met.

2. The matter has been examined in consultation with the Ministry of Law, and It has been decided that if an official who has no casual leave to his credit comes late without sufficient justification and the administrative authority concerned is not prepared to condone the late coming but does not at the same time propose to take disciplinary action, it may inform the official, that he will be treated as on unauthorised absence for the day on which he has come late, and leaving to the official himself either to face the consequences of such unauthorised absence or to apply for eamed leave or any other kind of leave due and admissible for the entire day and the same may be sanctioned by the competent authority. [Govt. of India., M.H.A. (D.P. & A.R.) O.M. No. 28034/3/82-Estt.(A), dated the 5th March, 1982]

FORCED ABSENCE

Treatment of the period of absence on reinstatement after dismissal, removal or suspension (When no duty was performed) Clarifications

A Government servant was dismissed from service on the 8th March, 1927, and on appeal, was reinstated with effect from the 27th October, 1927. The appellate authority declared, under F.R. 54, that the period of unemployment between the dates of dismissal and reinstatement should be treated as spent on duty and allowed to count for leave and increments. As there was no post against which the lien of the Government servant could be shown for the per.iod of dismissal, the question arose whether in the absence of lien on a permanent post the period of unemployment could count for leave or, increments. It was decided decided that F.R. 54 is absolute and unconditional and that it could not be absolute if the condition of "lien" had first to be satisfied.

[GI., F.D. No. F/28-R-1/28, dt. 5th April, 1928)

The Government of India have conveyed the following clarifications in regard to certain points which have been raised in connection with he application of F.R. 54, 54-A and F.R. 54-B.

1. The decision of the competent authority under F.Rs 54, 54-A and 54-B is in respect of two separate and independent matters, viz; (a) pay and allowances for the period of absence, and (b) whether or not the period of absence should be treated as duty.
It is not necessary that the decision on (a) above should depend upon the decision of (b) above. The competent authority has the discretion to pay the proportionate pay and allowances and treat the period as duty for any specified purpose(s) or only to pay the proportionate pay and allowances. It has no discretion to pay full pay and allowances when the period is treated as "non-duty".

If no order is passed directing that the period of absence be treated as duty for any specified purpose, the period of absence should be treated as "non-duty". In such event, the past service (i.e.) service rendered before dismissal, removal, compulsory retirement or suspension will not be forfeited.

2. As F.R. 54 is absolute, the law of limitation restricting payment of arrears of subsistence allowance only for a period of three years in certain circumstances need not be invoked at the time of paying the arrears of pay and allowances for the period from the date of dismissal/ removal/compulsory retirement/suspension to the date of reinstatement in respect of all cases where the pay and allowances are regulated on reinstatement in accordance with the provisions contained in F.R. 54, F.R. 54-A and F.R. 54-B.

[Govt. of India, M.F., O.M. No. 15 (14) E-IV (59), dated the 25th May, 1962 and 9th August, 1962, read with the provisions of F.R. 54, 54-A and 54-B]

When suspension is regularised as leave, consequential recovery inescapable

A question having arisen whether in cases where the period of suspension is ordered to be treated as one spent on leave and when on conversion it is found that the greater part of the period is to be treated as extraordinary leave for which no leave salary is admissible, the recovery of the subsistence allowance already paid would be in order. The moment the period of suspension is converted into leave, it has the effect of vacating the order of suspension and it will be deemed not to have been passed at an. Therefore, if it is found that the total amount of subsistence and compensatory allowance that an officer received during the period of suspension exceeds the amount of leave salary and allowances, the excess will have to be refunded and there is no escape from this conclusion.

[Govt. of India, M.F. U.O. 3409/E-IV/53, dt. 25.04.1963]

ABSCONDING OFFICIALS

Action against absconding officials

The cases of loss and fraud are usually reported to the Police and the officials involved are placed under suspension. A scrutiny of these cases reveals that some of the departmental officials involved in such cases abscond and are not apprehended by the police. The official continued to be under suspension till they surrender or are apprehended by the Police and prosecuted. This results in two things, firstly, the cases drag on for a long time and secondly, if and when the absconding officials are apprehended and proceeded against they are required to be paid the subsistence allowance if they produce a certificate of nonemployment.

2. After careful consideration it has been decided that in such cases the competent disciplinary authorities may take the following actions :-

(a) A certificate should be obtained from the local police authorities to the effect that the whereabouts of the officials concemed are not known. This certificate should be placed on record in the concerned file.

(b) A brief statement of allegations and charges should be prepared and kept on the file.

(c) The disciplinary authority should himself record on the file the fact that the whereabouts of the officials concerned are not known and that the police authorities have also certified to that effect and therefore, it is not reasonably practicable to hold the inquiry contemplated under Rule 14 of the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965. The disciplinary authority can then take recourse to Rule 19 (ii) of CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965, wherein enquiry has to be dispensed with. Reasons for not holding enquiry should then be recorded in writing and the disciplinary authority should issue orders imposing such penalty as it deems fit. The allegations and charges have to be briefly discussed in the punishment order. Normally in such cases the punishment that could be meted out would be either removal or dismissal from service.

[D.G. P & T's letter No.4-22/PT-72/INV, dt. 04.07.1972]

Absence of the official despite notices Procedure for holding exparte inquiry

Whenever an official continues to remain absent from duty or overstays leave without permission and his movements are not known, or he fails to reply to official communications, the disciplinary authority may initiate action under Rule 14 of the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965. In all such cases, the competent authority should, by a Registered A.D. letter addressed to the official at the last known address, issue a charge-sheet in the form prescribed for the purpose and call upon the official to submit a written statement of defence within a reasonable period to be specified by that authority. If the letter is received undelivered or if the letter having been delivered, the official does not submit a written statement of defence on of before the specified date or at a subsequent stage does not appear in person before the enquiry officer, or otherwise, fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of CCS (CCA) Rules, the inquiring authority may holl an ex parte inquiry. The notices of all hearings should be served on the accused or communicated to him unless the first notice says that the inquiry will continue from day to day. In ex parte proceedings, the entire gamut of the inquiry has to be gone through. The notices to witnesses should be sent, the documentary evidences should be produced and marked, the Presenting Officer should examine the prosecution witnesses and the inquiring authority may put such questions to the witnesses as it thinks to be fit. The enquiring authority should record the reasons why he is proceeding ex parte and what steps he had taken to ask the accused official to take part in the enquiry and avail of all the opportunities available under the provisions of Rule 14 of the CCS (CCA) Rules. In such a case, the details of what has transpired in his absence, including depositions, should be furnished to the accused officer. During the course of enquiry, the accused is free to put in appearance and participate in the enquiry. If the accused appears in the inquiry when some business has already been transacted, it is not necessary to transact the same business again unless the accused official is able to give justification to the satisfaction of the Inquiry Officer for not participating in the enquiry earlier. The competent authority may, thereafter, proceed to pass the final orders dismissing or removing the official from service after following the prescribed procedure.

2. The procedure outlined above can be observed in the case of a Government servant whether permanent or temporary remaining absent without authority, etc. Such a Government servant should not be placed. under suspension but when an official who is under suspension disappears and cannot be contacted at his last known address, the suspension orders should be lifted and the proceedings in the manner stated above initiated for his removal in absentia. [Rules 63 and 64 of P. & T. Manual, Vol. III]

CONTINUOUS ABSENCE FOR MORE THAN FIVE YEARS

Termination of service for continuous absence from duty for more than five years without show-cause notice not valid

F.R. 18 lays down that -

"Unless the President, in view of exceptional circumstances of the case otherwise determines, no Government servant shall be granted leave of any kind for a continuous period exceeding five years."

CASE LAW

In the case of State of Assam v. Akshya Kumar Deb, Civil Appeal No. 59 of 1968; decided on 2.5.1975 (available in Landmark Judgments on Service Matters Vol. 2 compiled by the authors), the Hon'ble Supreme Court gave the findings :-

(a) that the services of a Government servant cannot be automatically terminated on the ground of continuous absence from duties for more than five years; and 

(b) that the principle of natural justice demand that an opportunity of showing cause against the proposal for terminating the services should be given to the Govt. servant.

While delivering the above judgment, the following observation of Justice Hidayatulla was cited :-

"It is true that the Government may visit the punishment of discharge or removal from service on a person rson who has absented himself by overstaying his leave but we do not think that Government can order a person to be discharged from service without at least telling him that they propose to remove him and giving him an opportunity of showing cause why he should not be removed. If this is done the incumbent will be entitled to move against the punishment for, if his plea succeeds, he will not be removed..

Absence from duty Termination of service of a permanent Railway servant on the expiry of five years under the Railway Establishment Code, Rule 204 (F.R. 18) Whether amounts to his illegal removal

The contention that it is merely a declaration under the relevant Rules that the Railway servant has ceased to be in service on the expiry of the prescribed period of absence, i.e, five years is untenable, because as held by the High Court, the matter is no longer res integra and it is concluded by the Supreme Court's decision in Jai Shankar v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1966 SC 492. Accordingly, on the admitted position that the plaintiff Railway servant was given no reasonable opportunity against the action proposed, his removal from service was illegal and the impugned order was null and void. [Narendra Nath Mohanty v. Union of India AIR 1967, Orissa 171 (172)]

Absence of a permanent Government servant for five years - No action by the Government Relief for reinstatement If can be granted by the Court

When the petitioner did not join his new post and remained continuously absent for more than five years, it was urged by the State that no relief should be granted to him, since under the relevant Service Rules he had ceased to be in service. The Court held that it was due to sheer callousness on the part of the public authority that no action was taken against the Government servant and that in view of the circumstances, the relief sought for by the petitioner, that is, an order of posting to be issued by the Government, and he should be deemed to be continuing in service, must be granted. There shall be, of course, no bar for the Government to initiate appropriate disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner; [Dr. Kailash Chandra Das v. State of Orissa and others (1975)

1 SLR 444 (445, 446)]

STRIKE, ETC., AND BREAK IN SERVICE UNDER F.R.17-A

Unauthorised absence Provision of F.R.

F.R. 17-A lays down as follows:

"Without prejudice to the provisions of Rule 27 of the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972, a period of an unauthorised absence-

(1) in the case of employees working in industrial establishments, during a strike which has been declared Illegal under the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act; 1947, or any other law for the time being in force;

(ii) in the case of other employees as a result of acting in Combination or in concerted manner; such as during a strike, without any authority from, or valid reason to the satisfaction of the competent authority; and

(iii) in the case of an individual employee, remaining absent unauthorisedly or deserting the post; shall be deemed to cause an interruption or break in the service of the employee, unless otherwise decided by the competent authority for the purpose of leave travel concession, quasi-permanency and eligibility for appearing in departmental examinations, for which a minimum period of continuous service is required.

Explanation 1: For purposes of this rule, "Strike" includes a general, token, sympathetic or any similar strike, and also a participation in a bandh or in similar activities.

Explanation 2: In this Rule, the term "Competent Authority" means the "Appointing Authority".

CASE LAW

F.R. 17-A not violative of Articles 14 or 16 of the constitution So far as the vires of F.R. 17-A is concerned, no arguments were advanced and rightly so as it cannot be said that the same is violative of Articles 14 or 1601 the Constitution of India. F.R. 17-A does not confer arbitrary power on any authority nor can it be said to be unreasonable or unfair or creates classification which cannot be held to be reasonable. Break in service will not affect the seniority of the employee and it can not also affect the retrial benefits If it is so decided by the competent authority.

[All India RMS & MMS Employees Union and others v. Union of India and others, 1992 (3) SLJ (CAT), 139 (Bombay)]

Strike If resorted to by Government servants - Effect

Under our Constitution, the right to strike is not a fundamental right. It may be open to a citizen to go on a strike or withhold his labour.But different consideration arises when there is a strike in a private concem, and when a strike is by Government employees. Further, even among Government employees a distinction may have to be made between those who are employed in what are commercial undertakings of Govemment and those who are employed in the administration. Though a Government servant as a citizen may have a right to strike, that would not take away the power of the Government to dismiss a Government servant for good and sufficient reason as provided in the CCA Rules. It also goes without saying that the administration cannot be run properly, if those who are

serving the administration act in an undisciplined manner. [Meghraj v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1956 Raj 28]

Whether strike can be resorted to by the Government servants in support of their demands

As a matter of policy, the Government do not treat the Civil servants at par with the Industrial workers in so far as their "right to strike" is concerned. This discrimination between the two categories of employees as regards their right to strike is not a matter for any court to adjudicate upon. If, therefore, strike' is totally prohibited in certain services and an embargo is imposed in particular categories of employees, it is fully within the discretion of the Government as an employer framing such rules.

Rama Rao v. Accountant General, Bombay, AIR (1963) Bom. 121]

[ Peaceful and orderly demonstration intended to convey to the employer, the feelings of the employees would fall within the freedom guaranteed under clauses (a) and (b) of Article 19 (1) of the Constitution. There is no fundamental right to hold meetings, etc., in Government premises. If it is otherwise, there would be bound to be chaos in our offices. The fact that the citizens of the country have freedom of speech, freedom to assemble peacefully and freedom to form associations does not mean that they can exercise these freedoms at whatever place they may like.

[Railway Board v. Niranjan, AIR 1969 SC 966]

There are different modes of demonstrations, for example, go-slow, sit-in, work-to-rule, absenteeism, etc., and strike is one such mode of demonstration by workers of their rights. The right to demonstrate and, therefore, right to strike is an important weapon in the armory of workers. This right has been recognised by almost all democratic countries. Though not raised to the high pedestal of a fundamental right, it is recognised as a mode of redress for resolving the grievances of workers. But the right to strike is not absolute under our Industrial Jurisprudence and restrictions have been placed on it. [B.R. Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 1 (8)].

Reasonable opportunity Including the right to be heard in person

to be given before invoking the penal provisions of F.R. 17-A

F.R. 17-A provides that a period of an unauthorised absence, in the category of cases mentioned therein, shall be deemed to cause an interruption or break in the service of the employees, unless otherwise decided by the competent authority for certain purposes. An order passed by the P&T authorities in the case of some of their employees, invoking FR.17-A was struck down by the Lucknow Bench of Allahabad High Court on the ground that issue of such an order without giving a reasonable opportunity of representation and being heard in person, if so denied to the person concerned, would be against the principle of natural justice. The question of amending F.R. 17-A as also Rule 28 of the CCS (Pension) Rules and SR 200 is under consideration in consultation with the Ministry of law.

2. The above position is brought to the notice of all Ministries/ Departments so that if there are occasions of invoking F.R. 17-A, etc., they may keep in mind the procedural requirement that an order under F.R. 17-A, etc., should be preceded by extending to the person concerned a reasonable opportunity of representation and being heard in person if so desired by him/her.

[Govt. of India, Dept. of Per. & Trg., O.M. No. 33011/2(S)/84-Est (B), dated the 2nd May, 1985]

Permission to appear in departmental examination not allowed only when F.R. 17-A disabilities are imposed

1. This is further to clarify that according to the existing instructions where notice has been issued to the concerned officials for imposition of disabilities under provision of F.R. 17-A and final order imposing disabilities are yet to be issued, provisional permission may be granted for the, concerned officials to appear in the departmental examinations if they are otherwise eligible. The announcement of the result of examination for the concerned officials would, however, depend on whether disabilities under F.R. 17-A are imposed on them or not after due consideration of their response to the notice.

2. However, in cases where disabilities under the provisions of F.R. 17-A have been imposed and appeals submitted by the concerned officials are pending disposal by the competent authority, no permission to appear in departmental examination can be given, unless and until the disabilities are removed by the order on the appeal and they are otherwise found eligible. [Dept. of Posts, Letter No. 137-15/89-SPB II, dt. 10th October, 1989] No disabilities under F.R. 17-A in regard to efficiency bar, promotion and special pay/allowance.

1. It has been reported by the Service Unions that crossing of Efficiency Bar has been denied to officials, who have been issued orders under F.R. 17-A. According to these Unions,. In many cases promotions have been held up and special allowances and special pay have also been withdrawn.

2. The matter has been examined and it Is clarified that as far as crossing of Efficiency Bar Is concerned the disabilities under F.R. 17-A should not stand In the way of an official If he is otherwise found suitable to cross efficiency Bar. Special Pay and special allowances should hot be withdrawn merely on the ground that F.R. 17-A has been invoked.

3. Interruption of break-in-service under F.R. 17-A has the following disabilities :-

Leave Travel Concession; quasi permanency; and Eligibility for appearing In Departmental examination for which a maximum period of continuous service is required.

4. Promotion of employees can be by way of consideration by DPC and I or qualifying in Departmental Examination. If, in the case of employee, promotion Is dependent on passing a qualifying examination, for appearing In which a minimum period of continuous service has been prescribed and In his case F.R. 17-A has been Invoked, It would have an Indirect effect on his promotion. Though promotion by DPC and Departmental examination do have some similarities, it is not the intension that break-In-service under F.R. 17-A should affect promotion through normal DPC.

[Govt. of India, Dept. of Posts, Letter No. 137-13/85[SPB II], dated the 19th August, 1986]

Guidelines for dealing with representations for condonation of break-in-service

Representations for condonation of breaks and concomitant disabilities were hitherto being considered and decided by Member (A) on behalf of P&T Board. The matter has been examined afresh and it has been decided that henceforward representations for condonation against such break-In-service could be decided by Heads of Circles who have been delegated the powers of Head of Deptt. under SR 2(10). While deciding such representations either in favour or against, the following guidelines may be kept in view:

(1) In no case the condonation of break-in-service should be considered as a routine matter. A break-In-service shall not be condoned except on receipt of a formal representation from the employee concemed about the said absence.

(ii) The absentee in his representation should have expressed unqualified regret with an assurance that he will not be indulging in such conduct in future.

(iii) After the receipt of such apology, the competent authority may even consider watching the work and conduct of the petitioner for some time before taking its decision on the prayer for condonation.

(iv) There was indeed a grave provocation from an outside factor for such unauthorised absence.

(v) The departmental superiors had shown certain callousness or indifference to any genuine complaint brought to their notice by the members of the staff which resulted in such unauthorised absence. (In cases of doubt the Heads of Circles may consult in confidence some of their counterparts with a view to ensuring certain amount of uniformity in practice.)

(vi) Non-condonation of break-in-service under F.R. 17-A should not be the guiding factor for non-condonation of break-in-service for purposes of pension under Rule 27 of the Pension Rules.

Earlier it was pointed out that strike is a strike even if it is for five minutes. Duration is irrelevant. While there is no doubt that strike even for a few minutes is a strike for the purpose of Rule 7 of the CCS (Conduct) Rules, the Heads of Circles need not be rigid In their stand for condonation of break, subject to the fulfillment of the aforesaid conditions, if the duration of absence is short.

The aforesaid guidelines are only indicative in nature and not complete and comprehensive and have been prescribed to provide a broad parameter to enable the Heads of Departments to decide such representations. It is requested that all pending and future representations may be decided by the competent authority on their own merit and in the light of the factors outlined above. [D.G., P&T's letter No. 14/12/82-Vig. III, dt. 23.04.1983.] Unauthorised absence for joining strike - Provisions of the Conduct

Rules

Rule 7 of CCS (Conduct) Rules, 1964, lays down as follows :-

"7. Demonstration and Strikes

No Government servant shall -

(i) engage himself or participate in any demonstration which is prejudicial to the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or which involves contempt of Court, defamation or incitement to an offence, or

(ii) report to or in any way abet any form of strike or coercion or physical duress in connection with any other matter pertaining to his service the service of any other Government servant." or

Interpretation of what constitutes a "Strike"

Rule 7(11) of the CCS (Conduct) Rules, 1964, provides that no Government servant shall resort to or in any way abet any form of strike in connection with any matter pertaining to his service or the service of any other Government servant. Instances have come to the notice of Government where employees resort to various methods of protests for redress of grievances, some of which are tantamount to strike. Reference have been received seeking clarification whether certain acts are covered under the definition of "strike" and if so, whether action can be taken against such employees for violation of the Conduct Rules. It is, therefore, clarified that "strike" means refusal to work or stoppage

or slowing down of work by a group of employees acting in combination,

and includes :-

(i) mass absentation from work without permission (which is wrongly described as "mass casual leave");

(ii) refusal to work overtime when such overtime work is necessary in the public interest;

(iii) resort to practices or conduct which is likely to result in or results in the cessation or substantial retardation of work in any organisation. Such practices would include, what are called "go-slow", "sit down", "pen down", "stay-in", "token", "sympathetic", or any other similar strike; as also absence from work for participation in a Bandh or any similar movements.

Government servants who resort to action of the above kind violate Rule 7(ii) of the CCS (Conduct) Rules, 1964, and disciplinary action can be taken against them. It may be noted that the list of activities which are covered under the definition of "strike" as enumerated above is only illustrative and not exhaustive. It only clarifies the position in respect of practices which are often resorted to at present.

[Govt. of India, M.Η.Α. Ο.Μ. No. 25/23/68-Ests. (A), dated the 9th December, 1966.]

Treatment of period of absence for participation in a strike The principle of "No Work No Pay" should not be circumvened in any way including by grant of leave to a Railway servant for the period of absence caused due to participation in a strike.

[Rly. Board's No. E (LR) 1177 STI, dated 15th July, 1978]

Special Casual Leave to employees who could not attend office on account of Bandh, Curfew, failure of transport, etc. Government of India's instructions

The absence of Central Government employees on a day or days of a bandh may fall under the following categories:-

(i) Where a Government servant had applied or applies for leave for the day or days of the bandh for genuine reasons, e.g., medical grounds, of which the competent authority is satisfied;

(ii) Where the competent authority is satisfied that the absence of individual concerned was entirely due fo reasons beyond his control. e.g., due to failure of transport or disturbances or picketing or imposition of curfew, etc.

(iii) unauthorized absence, e.g., where conditions mentioned in (i) or (ii) above are not satisfied.

As regards the first category, leave of the kind due and admissible, including Casual Leave may be granted to the Govt. servants concerned.

As regards the second category, if the competent authority is satisfied that the absence was due to failure of transport facilities, Special Casual Leave may be granted to such Government servants who had to come from a distance of more than 3 miles to their place of duty. If the absence was due to picketing or disturbances or curfew, then too Special Casual Leave may be granted to regularise the absence, without insisting on the condition that the distance between their place of duty and their residence should be more than 3 miles Special Casual Leave, in either of the cases mentioned above may be granted with the concurrence of the Ministry/ Department concerned.

2. As regards the third category mentioned above, under the proviso to F.R. 17 (1), an officer who is absent from duty without any authority shall not be entitled to any pay and allowances during the period of such absence. Unauthorised absence of this kind, apart from resulting In loss of pay and allowances for the period of such absence, would also constitute a break. In service entailing forfeiture of past service for all purposes, unless the break itself Is condoned and treated as dies non. If the break Is condoned and treated as dies non by the competent authority, the service rendered prior to the break will be counted for all purposes, but the period of the break itself will not count for any purpose.

3. There might, however, be a case in which a number of Government employees acting in combination or in a concerted manner may absent themselves from duty for a part of a day only. The provisions of Ministry of Home Affairs O.M. No. 60/17/64-Ests.(A), dated the 4th August, 1965, shall not apply to such a case. Their absence even for a part of a day In the above circumstances shall be deemed to be unauthorized absence for a whole day and action may be taken in regard to the unauthorized absence as outlined in Para. 2 above.

[Govt. of India, Cabinet Secretariat (Dept. of Personnel) O.M. No. 27/6/71-Estt. (B), dated the 1st November, 1971.]

CASE LAW

Penalty can be Imposed for unauthorized absence on bandh day

Where the Government issued a circular Impressing on all Govt. servants to attend offices as usual on the threatened bandh day, the petitioners abstained from work and applied for leave on that day and the leave was refused. It was held that the disciplinary authority can proceed against the petitioners for Imposition of any penalty for unauthorised absence in accordance with the Law. [1979 (1) SLR 775 Cal.]

BREAK IN SERVICE VIS-A-VIS DIES NON

Cases where unauthorised absence should not be treated merely as dies non

Instructions have been issued from time to time that unauthorised absence in pursuance of concerted action by a group of employees acting in combination should be treated as unauthorised absence resulting in break in service. Only individual cases of unauthorised absence from duty which is not in pursuance of concerted action by a group of employees acting in combination may, however, be treated as dies non. Dies non does not constitute break in service but only the days treated as dies non are not counted as duty for any purpose. Under no circumstances, absence on the part of group of employees in combination or in a concerted manner should be treated merely as dies non but it should be treated as unauthorised absence constituting break in service.

[D. G., P&T's letter No. 105/63/79-Disc. II, dt. 5th November, 1979.]

Action In case of absence of official from duty, refusal to perform duties, etc.

Absence of officials from duty without proper permission or when on duty in office, they refused to perform the duties assigned to them is subversive of discipline. In cases of such absence from work, the leave sanctioning authority may order that the days on which the work is not performed be treated as dies non, i.e., they will neither count as service nor be construed as break in service. This will be without prejudice to any other action that the competent authorities might take against the persons resorting to such practice. [Rule 62, P. &T. Manual, Vol. III]

Dies non for late coming is not an approved procedure

According to the instructions above, the day can be marked as dies non by the leave sanctioning authority only under three circumstances, viz.:

(i) When the official remains absent from duty without prior information,

(ii) When on duty in office, the official leaves the office without proper permission, and

(iii) The official remains in office, but refuses to perform duty assigned to him.

From the conditions mentioned above it is clear that an official can be marked as dies non even if he performs duty for part of the day in case he leaves office without permission or when he refuses to perform duties while remaining in office. But a day on which an official comes late and works throughout the day during office hours will not be marked as dies non. It is accordingly clarified that treating the day as dies non for coming

late is not contemplated in the rules. The proper course in such cases would be to debit the casual leave account of the official as per instructions issued from time to time.

[D.G.P.&T's letter No. 10-44/79-PE.II, dt. 26.11.1979.]

UNAUTHORISED ABSENCE VIS-A-VIS PENSIONARY BENEFITS

Effect of interruption in service - Provision of Pension Rules

Rule 27 of CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, provides as follows:-

(1) An interruption in the service of a Govt. servant entails forfeiture, of his past service, except in the following cases :-

(a) authorized leave of absence;

(b) unauthorized absence in continuation of authorized leave of absence so long as the post of absentee is not filled substantively;

(c) suspension, where it is followed by reinstatement, whether in the same or different post, or where the Government servant dies or is permitted to retire or is retired on attaining the age of compulsory retirement while under suspension;

(d) transfer to non-qualifying service in an establishment under the control

of the Government if such transfer has been ordered by a competent

authority in the public interest;

(e) joining time while on transfer from one post to another.

(2) Notwithstanding any thing contained In sub-rule (1), the appointing authority may, by order, commute retrospectively the periods of absence without leave as extraordinary leave.

Condonation of unauthorised absence for purposes of pension - Government's Guidelines

Instructions have been issued from time to time that unauthorised absence in pursuance of concerted action by a group of employees acting in combination should be treated as unauthorised absence resulting in break in service. F.R. 17-A has also been introduced which enumerates the disabilities that would occur as a result of break in service. It has been noticed that in a few cases of unauthorised absence as a result of concerted action, a few appointing authorities did not condone the break under Rule 27 of the Pension Rules for counting the previous service which adversely affected the Pension of the officials. In this connection, it needs to be pointed out that the principles to be adopted for condonation of break in service for purposes of pension and that for purposes of other disabilities enumerated in F.R.17-A are different. The fact that break in service has not been condoned for purposes of Leave Travel Concession, quasi permanency and eligibility to appear at departmental examinations should and need not influence the appointing authority adversely In deciding the question of condonation of break for counting the past service of the official for purposes of pension. It is not the intention of the Government to deny pensionary benefits to the employees In all cases of break of service. If necessary, the appointing authority may, in its discretion, not condone the break in service on account of unauthorised absence for purposes of pension only in exceptional and grave circumstances and not as a matter of course. The question of condonation of break-in-service for the purpose of Pension Rules may be considered suo motu without waiting for a representation from the affected officials and orders issued so that the retired employees are not put to financial hardship. It is required that these instructions may be brought to the notice of all the appointing

authorities for their information and guidance. [D.G., P&T's letter No. 14/12/82-Vig. III, dt. 23.11.1982.]

Non-condonation of break- in-service for concomitant disabilities should not be the guiding factor for non-condonation of break-in-service for purpose of pension under Rule 27 of the Pension Rules.

[D. G., P&T's letter No. 14/12/82-Vig. III, dt. 23.04.1983.] It is not the intention of the Government to deny pensionary

benefits in all cases of break-in-service

I am directed to refer to your D.O. letter No. Union/24-11/December, 2000, dated January 3, 2001, on the above subject.

2. The matter has been carefully examined in the light of the facts contained in your letter. I am accordingly directed to state that so far as condonation of unauthorised absence is concerned, instructions already exist under Rule 28 of CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 and the Government of India decision thereunder. In terms of the said Government of India decision, I am desired to inform you that it Is not the Intention of the Government to deny the pensionary benefits to the employees in all cases of break in of service. If necessary, the Appointing Authority may in its discretion not condone the break in service, on account of unauthorised absence for purposes of pension only in exceptional and grave circumstances and not as a matter of course.

[Gl., (Dept. of Posts) Letter No. 8-7/2(11)-SR, Dt. 24.01.2001]

CASE LAW

Pensionary benefits may be withheld for the proved charge of unauthorised absence from duty

It was held by the Supreme Court as under:

"The Tribunal has held that no charge of grave misconduct was franed or found proved against the respondent. This is clearly incorrect looking to the express language of the charge as framed and the Inquiry Report. The charge as framed expressly charged the respondent with having committed grave misconduct by remaining absent from duty without authorisation and by continuing to disobey Government orders issued to him for joining duty. He was charged with lack of devotion to duty and of conduct unbecoming of a Government servant and this was in violation of provisions of Rule 3 (1), sub-clauses (ii) and (ii) of CCS (Conduct) Rules. The finding also is that this charge of grave misconduct has been proved in the enquiry report. The conduct, therefore, of the respondent falls under Rule 9 of CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 and the order of the President cannot be faulted. [Union of India v. B. Dev, JT 1998 (5) SC 480; 1998 (4) SCALE 557]

Pension and gratuity cannot be withheld for unauthorised but not wilful absence

Disciplinary proceedings were initiated against the Government servant under Rule 3 (ii) and (iii) of the CCS (Conduct) Rules and were later continued under Rule 9 of the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972. The charge against the appellant was that he absented himself from duty without any authorisation and despite his being asked to join duty he remained absent. The Enquiry Officer, however, held that his absenting himself from duty could not be termed as entirely wilful because he could not move due to his wife's illness. The Enquiry Officer recommended that the case of the appellant should be considered sympathetically. The recommendation and finding of the Inquiry Officer were accepted by the President. However, it was decided to withhold full gratuity and payment of pension In consultation with the UPSC.

The Supreme Court held that there was no finding that the appellant had committed grave misconduct as charged and that the exercise of power under Rule 9 of CCS (Pension) Rules was not warranted.

[D. V. Kapoor v. Union of India, (1990) 4 SCC 314; 1990 SCC (L&S) 696; (1990) 14 ATC 906; AIR 1990 SC 1923].

It has to be seen if the absence was for unavoidable reasons

In case a worker is alleged to have remained absent without taking leave, it is necessary to see whether he had sent any leave application and if so, whether the leave application was received in time or subsequently and whether there were any justified reasons for refusing leave. Though the sanction of leave may depend upon exigency of business but still it cannot be refused when a worker suffers from illness which prevents him from joining duty or he has to remain absent for other unavoidable reasons. If a worker has applied for extension of leave from outstation then it should be seen whether any reply was or was not sent to him. In certain circumstances, if no reply is sent then the presumption might arise that the leave was granted. [Krishan Vallabh v. Rajnagar Mills Co. Ltd., 1957 ICR 409]

Unauthorised absence is a grave misconduct

2. The appellant was appointed as a Security Officer of the respondent Bank in 1980 and was working in Middle Management Cadre (Grade III) as Manager, Security in 1998 when he was dismissed from the service of the respondent Bank for alleged violation of Regulation 13 of the Union Bank of India Officer Employees (Conduct) Regulations, 1976. In the charge-sheet, it was alleged that he was not reporting for his duties since 3.6.1997. It was further stated that the appellant's services were transferred to Chennai but the appellant did not carry out his transfer orders to Chennai and was remaining absent without sanction of leave. Regulation 13 (1) requires that no Officer-employee should absent himself in case of sickness or accident without submitting a proper medical certificate. The Bank's Staff circular, dated 2.6.1981 also provides that the Management is not bound by the certificate produced by the employee and may require him to appear before the Medical practitioner of Bank's choice for medical examination.

3. The Inquiring Authority came to the conclusion that though the appellant was remaining absent on grounds of illness, the real reason was that he was reluctant to carry out the order of transfer to Chennai.

4. The Disciplinary Authority awarded the punishment of dismissal from services of the Bank concurring with the above observation of the Inquiring Authority. The Disciplinary Authority further held the appellant guilty of the following acts of misconduct :-

(a) Contravention of Regulation 13 of the Union Bank of India Officer employee's (Conduct) Regulations, 1976.

(b) Failure to discharge his duties with devotion and diligence.

(c) Acting in a manner unbecoming of a Bank Officer.

5. The Appellate Authority in dismissing the appellant's appeal held:

that it is the conduct of the petitioner "taking undue advantage of

his normal sickness to avoid transfer to the extent possible", which was not genuine.

(a)

(b) that "his sickness" was not such where he could "not attend his normal office duties."

6. The High Court held that the appellant was adamant in not carrying out the transfer order and tried his best to avoid transfer until he finally filed upon this Court in challenging his transfer from Mumbai to Chennai. The findings of the High Court was challenged-before us in this appeal on the ground that the same is not based on evidence and is contrary to the opinion/recommendations of the medical experts regarding the illness of the petitioner.

7. We have perused the pleadings and the orders impugned in this appeal and also the annexures filed along with the appeal and heard the lengthy arguments advanced by the learned Counsel appearing on either side.

8. We are of the opinion that the appellant is not entitled to any relief in these proceedings. The appellant remained absent from his duty for a very long time, i.e., from 3.6.1997 to 25.11.1997 without any reasonable cause and justification In spite of the respondent's request to join the duty and in spite of the respondent's granting him further time to join the duty. The conduct of the appellant in remaining absent for such a long time shows that he was bent upon to evade the transfer order in any possible manner. The grounds of ailment were taken as a ruse to avoid transfer which Is amply proved by the conduct of the appellant, when he had unauthorizedly remained absent on the ground that he was unable to attend the duty due to illness for such a long period but he was quite capable of attending the Court proceedings on the various days and was also capable of coming to Delhi to file a petition before this Court. The concurrent finding of the inquiry is that he has been shifting stands because initially on the very day of the service of transfer order he gave a representation mentioning illness of his wife and the studies of his son for the purpose of deferment of the transfer to Chennal from Mumbai. But in the other representation to other Officer of the Bank, which he has produced to the Bank, he has stated the reason of his illness as an excuse. Thus, the conduct of the appellant in trotting up all these defence show that he was trying to avoid transfer to Chennai through all possible means. The reason for deferment of transfer given by him before the High Court and this Court in the writ petition and the appeal filed by him against the transfer order was simple ruse to avoid the transfer. It has been affirmed by the Court in that proceeding that the transfer was done as per exigencies of the Bank. The transfer of the appellant was effected to a large city namely Chennai, which as per his own admission has very good medical facilities which are comparable to those in Mumbai. The service of specialist officers and for that matter all officers in the. Bank are transferable on all India basis and they are liable to be posted anywhere in India subject to the personnel and man power requirement and exigencies of the Bank.

9. This Court has repeatedly held that the factual finding of the Disciplinary Authority after holding a detailed inquiry and after going through elaborate evidence are not assailable in the Courts unless the breach of principles of natural justice or the violation of any rules or any material irregularity on the face of record is alleged and shown. However, in this case the High Court in its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution has again gone into all aspects of the enquiry in detail and has come to the same factual findings as the Disciplinary Authority and the Appellate Authority. Such concurrent findings by three different Authorities including the High Court should not be disturbed by this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution. We, therefore, have no other option except to dismiss this appeal. Accordingly, the appeal stands dismissed.

[Y.P. Sarabhai v. Union Bank of India & another, C.A. No. 2672 of 2003; 2007 (1) SLJ (Supreme Court)].

Unauthorised absence from duty is an act of misconduct

The contention of the applicant that the alleged imputation did not amount to a misconduct is not convincing, because unauthorised absence from duty is definitely a manifestation of lack of devotion to duty, and therefore it cannot be said that it does not amount to a misconduct.

[T.K. Sajeed Begum v. Union of India and others (1990) 14 ATC 7 (Ernakulam)]

Leave is not a right Unauthorised absence is a misconduct. Disciplinary action for unauthorised absence is legal

2. Petitioner was working as Executive Engineer with the respondent when he applied for two years' extra ordinary leave for higher studies abroad. Respondent considered the request of the petitioner favourably and granted extraordinary leave for two years for studies with effect from 15th July, 1994. Petitioner, after the expiry of the period of two years, did not return to India and instead wrote a letter, dated 20th June, 1996 from California, USA with a request to sanction extraordinary leave for a further period of two years. The respondent duly considered the request of the petitioner and allowed further extraordinary leave for a period of two years with effect from 15th July, 1996, to complete studies of M.S. in Electrical Engineering from West Coast University, Los Angeles, USA. A request, dated 25th June, 1998 was again received from the petitioner for extension of extraordinary leave by three years. Respondents duly considered this request but did not grant leave as in the meanwhile, the petitioner was charge-sheeted in a vigilance case vide Memorandum, dated 13.2.1998, which was duly served upon the petitioner at his last known. address in the USA. Since the petitioner did not return despite his leave having not been sanctioned, the respondent on 17.3.1999 issued a memorandum to the petitioner proposing action against him under Regulation 7 of the Regulations for his wilful unauthorised absence with effect from 15th July, 1998. According to the respondents by wilfully absenting from duty unauthorisedly the petitioner had committed grave misconduct and had rendered himself liable for initiation of departmental disciplinary action against him. The petitioner was duly served with the memorandum, dated 17th March, 1999 but he did not choose to file reply to the same nor returned back for duty. By invoking. Regulation 10 of the Regulation, respondent dispensed with the holding of the departmental inquiry and issued notice to the petitioner to show cause as to why his services should not be dispensed with. On receiving no reply, the respondent imposed the penalty of dismissal from service upon the petitioner. This petition has now been filed by the petitioner challenging the order of dismissal and also for a direction to be given to the respondents to grant to the petitioner all retrial benefits.

3. The stand taken by the petitioner in the writ petition is that on 22.3.1999, the petitioner had written a letter to the respondent expressing his willingness to take voluntary retirement from service as it was not practicable for him to continue to serve the respondent. It is subinitted that once the petitioner had submitted the letter expressing his willingness to take voluntary retirement, the respondent could not dismiss him from service and in any case even on receipt of such letter since the respondent had not given any reply thereto, the offer of voluntary retirement would be deemed to have been approved by the respondent. In support of his contentions, the petitioner has relied upon the judgment reported as Union of India and other v. Sayed Muzaffar Mir; AIR 1995 SC 176; 1995 (1) SLJ 121 (SC); State of Haryana and others v. S.K. Singhal, AIR 1999 SC 1829; 1999 (3) SLJ 194 (SC) and Manjushree Pathak v. Assam Industrial Development Corporation Ltd., AIR 2000 SC 2769; 2001 (1) SLJ 375 (SC)

4. The respondents in their counter affidavit have denied their having received the letter, dated 22.3.1999 alleged to have been written by the petitioner seeking voluntary retirement from service. It is stated in the counter affidavit that no such letter was ever written and it was only an afterthought by the petitioner after he had received the memorandum dated 17.5.1999 whereby the respondent had initiated departmental proceedings against the petitioner. This categorical stand having been taken by the respondent in their counter affidavit, that letter, dated 22nd March, 1999 was not received by them and no request for voluntary retirement was made by the petitioner. The same has not been rebutted by the petitioner. Instead of filing rejoinder to the counter-affidavit wherein it was clearly asserted by the respondent that no such letter was received, leamed counsel for the petitioner made a statement on 15.3.2002 that he did not wish to file rejoinder to the counter-affidavit. The fact that the petitioner has not filed rejoinder to the counter-affidavit clearly shows that he was not in a position to deny the allegations of the respondent that the letter dated 22.3.1999 was not received by them. I have, therefore, no reason to disbelieve the averments made on oath by the respondent in their counter-affidavit that no request had been received from the petitioner seeking voluntary retirement. In this view of the matter, the judgments cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner are of no assistance to him.

It is not denied that as per leave rules, the petitioner could not claim leave as a matter of right and leave having been refused by the competent authority, the petitioner was required to join in duty. Petitioner having remained absent unauthorisedly without sanction of the competent authority, disciplinary action was rightly taken against him. The services of the petitioner having been terminated after following procedure laid down by regulations and no infirmity having been shown therein, in my opinion, the petitioner is not entitled to any relief in this petition and the same is accordingly dismissed.

[Ashok Kumar Aggarwal v. Delhi Vidyut Board, C.W. No. 4423 of 2001 & C.M. No. 7612 of 2001; Delhi High Court; 2004 (2) SLJ] Unauthorised absence amounts to abandonment of service

The applicant was a casual labour. He had acquired temporary status, but not in regular service. He remained absent with effect from 24.7.1986 to 11.7.1992. He appeared before the third respondent on 14.7.1992 with a prayer to allow him to join his duties. He also produced Medical Certificate to state that all along he was sick and under treatment of Dr. K.M. Rajendran, but he was not allowed to join his duties and, therefore, he has filed the present O.A.

2. The learned Counsel for the applicant submifted that the applicant was not allowed to join the duties as he was on unauthorised absence and he had also committed breach of Railway Medical Rules. This amounted to misconduct and, therefore, the services of the applicant could not be dispensed with without holding a departmental enquiry. He also referred to chapter 23 of Indian Railway Establishment Manual, Vol. I to submit that a casual labour with temporary status was entitled to rights and privileges as a regular employee of the Railways. He also relied on a decision of the Allahabad High Court in Balwant Raj v. Union of India, AIR 1968 All. 14, and that of the Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Amar Singh Harikar AIR 1966 SC 1313, in support of his contentions.

4. The learned Counsel for the respondents submitted that a casual labour with temporary status cannot claim rights and privileges of a regular Railway servant. It was submitted that the absence of the applicant amounted to abandonment of service and, therefore, he could not be allowed to rejoin the duties.

5. On hearing the learned Counsel for the parties and pursuing the records, we are of the view, that even according to the applicant he had only acquired a temporary status and had not acquired the regular status with the Railways. Under the circumstances, after having remained absent from the service for such a long period between 24.7.1986 to 14.7.1992 he cannot claim as of right reinstatement in service. As he was not a regular employee and as his absence was without the permission of the respondents, the absence was unauthorised and for that reason he cannot claim that the period of his absence could not be treated as unauthorised without holding a disciplinary enquiry against him. Infringement of Medical Rules by a Casual Labour could also not give a right to claim departmental enquiry in a case of the present nature.

6. The applicant as a Casual Labour with temporary status may be entitled to privileges and rights of temporary Government employee as mentioned in Chapter 23 in case his services were terminated by the Railways. Abandonment of service by the applicant in this manner cannot be equated with termination of service by the employer and, therefore, he is not entitled to the rights and privileges as mentioned in Chapter 23 of Indian Railway Establishment Manual (IREM).

7. The decision of the Allahabad High Court was with reference to a regularly appointed temporary Railway servant and, therefore, it cannot be applied to the case of the applicant who was only having a temporary status. Further, the employee before, the Allahabad High Court was hospitalised in a Railway Hospital and was getting treatment for a long period of three years In that Railway Hospital. Whereas in the present case, the applicant was getting treatment from one Dr. K.M. Rajendran who is stated to be Authorised Medical Attendant with Registration No. 25707 in Government Hospital, Vriddachalam. He was not a Doctor in any Railway Hospital. The other decision of the Supreme Court relied on by the learned counsel for the applicant Is also not applicable in the present case because there was no order of removal, dismissal or discharge. The applicant's only case is that he had remained absent due to his sickness and therefore when after a period of four years he came to resume his duties, he should have been allowed by the respondents to join his duties.

[Prakash Palanimuthu, Khalasi v. Union of India & ors.; CAT Mumbai Bench; 2001 (3) SLJ (CAT)].

It is for the Government servant to prove the justification for his absence

It is for the employee to come forward with the reasons for his absence and to substantiate that on the basis of the said reasons there are compelling reasons for his absence. The department will not be in a position to know about the actual reasons for the absence of the employee and on the basis of mere reasons given in the leave applications It cannot be stated that the concerned authority was satisfied with regard to those reasons especially when leave was not granted. The only question that requires for consideration is as to whether there are compelling reasons for the said absence. Thus the question is as to whether the said absence is of a conduct unbecoming of a Government employee. Admittedly the employee had not participated in the inquiry and he had not examined any witness and he also had not appeared as witness. The justification for the absence, if any, had to be established by the employee and it is not for the department to show that there is no justification for the absence.

[Mir Rahamat Ali v. Secretary, Dept. of Telecom 1994 (1) SLJ (CAT) Hyderabad]

Whether unauthorised absence from duty amounts to misconduct

Admittedly the defence case of the writ petitioner opposite party was that during the pendency at the training centre he was injured, got injury on his left foot. He was shifted to hospital and was hospitalised. Plastering was made on his foot and admittedly he was in the hospital. He was discharged on 17.2.1989 and after two weeks he came back to the Training Centre and deposited the unfit certificate along with an application to Coy, Coy. Comdr. Training Coy., and apprised him about his condition. On 28th February, 1989, his mother came to meet him in the Training Centre and he prayed for 15 days' leave. But that leave prayed for was not granted on the alleged ground that he was on medical rest. He applied for outliving permission but it was refused. Doctors did not give him fit certificate and extended rest from time to time. At that time it was very difficult for him to move around in the barrack and as such he prayed for leave but that was also refused. Due to pain his problem increased and, according to him, he developed some mental problem. On 7th or 8th March, 1989 one person came from his native place and informed him that his only son went to school but did not return. He was very upset. He reached home and his family members took him to Berhampore District Hospital for treatment. It is his case that he does not remember what has happened to him. Doctor who treated him issued proper medical certificate and after coming back from Berhampore Hospital he sent a letter under certificate of posting to Commdr. on 4.3.1989. Again he sent letters from time to time. With the medical certificate he went to Intelligence Branch on 18.8.1989 for joining the duty. He was taken to Asstt. Commdr. Sri Y.K. Saxena by the Inspector S.M. Das but he was not permitted to join. After staying some days in pass section he went back home as he was not put on any duty. He further stated that on 1.8.1989 his sister's husband and his younger brother were murdered. Faced with this unprecedented situation it was stated that lapses occurred on his part. The Inquiring Officer, it appears had accepted the position but had taken very casual approach to this problem. It Is well within the domain of the Enquiring Officer to accept and reject any evidence and In the instant case the Inquiring Officer admitted the fact that his son was missing which was very shocking thing but observed that such shocking news and pain in the injured left foot cannot have any repercussion on the brain and or memory of the man.

The Court is not indenting to appraise all the evidence but in order to find out whether the defence for the lapses were wilful or otherwise, the Court had to look into the defence. In service jurisprudence misconduct has its own meaning. Every commission or omission does not amount to misconduct.

[Deputy Inspector General, Central Industrial Security Force, Eastern Zone, Govt. of India v. Shiv Kumar Roy, 1995 (1) SLR 133 (SLR))

No Government servant or employee of any Public Sector Undertaking has a right to be absent from duty without sanction of leave

Since the respondent had not obtained any sanctioned leave his absence from duty was unauthorised. No Govt. servant or any employee of public sector undertaking has a right to be absent from duty without sanction of leave, merely on account of pendency of representation against the order of transfer.

[Gujarat Electricity Board v. Atmaram Sungopal Poshani (1989) 3 SLJ 68 (SC): (1989) 3 SLR 684)]

Absence from duty - Termination of service - Validity

Where a teacher of a Government school took permission to leave station to appear at the public examination of M.Sc. (Maths) final, and came back to join his duty, he was not allowed to join duty because of his overstayal, and his service was terminated under Rule 96 (b) of the Rajasthan Service Rules. Admittedly, no opportunity was given to the Government servant because the authorities assumed that as he had no extraordinary leave to his credit and as he had asked himself for being relieved at his own risk and as no leave was sanctioned his services could be terminated under Rule 96 (b) read with Rule 86 of the Rajasthan Service Rules. The flaw, however, is that before terminating his services an opportunity as provided under Rule 34 of the Rules should have been given. As no opportunity was given to him there was a violation of the provisions of Art. 311 of the Constitution and the rules and the impugned order was liable to be quashed.

[Chetan Singh v. State of Rajasthan, (1977) 1 SLR 504 (Raj)) Absence on strike (Bandh) day - Break in service can be enforced

Where the Government issued a circular impressing on all Government servants to attend office as usual on the threatened bandh day, and the Government servants remained absent on that day and applied for leave for that day or for a period extending that date, which was refused and the Government ordered that pay for the day be recovered from the absentees and the absence was ordered to be treated as break in service, held that the order was bad in that in the absence of any specific rules the consequence of break in service cannot be imposed on them, though the Government could proceed against the petitioners for imposition of penalty for unauthorised absence in accordance with law. [Sukuman Bandopadhyaya v. State of West Bengal (1977) 1 SLR 775 (Cal); (1976) 1 LLJ 61 (Cal)]

Unauthorised absence Dismissal from service after taking all efforts - No irregularity

The case of the applicant has also been examined on merit/ The application was granted 60 days leave with effect from 13.2.1989 to 13.4.1989. Though the applicant applied for extension of leave for 30 days, but the same was not allowed by the competent authority on the ground of exigency of service. The applicant was informed to resume duty on the due date vide communication dated 20th April, 1989. The applicant, however, remained absent without sanctioned leave. Consequently, the applicant as well as his wife were informed through telegram requesting that the applicant be directed to report for duty. The applicant's son Satish Chandra Mishra (now substituted in place of the deceased employee) was also informed about the unauthorised absence of the applicant. Satish Chandra Mishra informed the unit that the applicant would be reaching the unit by 15.1.1990. Even thereafter, the applicant failed to resume his duty. The unit sent a registered letter again to the applicant to his registered address to report for duty within 10 days, otherwise steps would be taken under CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965. The applicant again failed to appear. Hence notice was published in the Newspaper in circulation in the applicant's home town/district (copy Annexure C-7). All these show that despite the above mentioned repeated messages, publication in the Newspaper, the applicant did not report for duty. It was in these circumstances, that the charge-sheet was sent to the applicant by registered post and after following the procedure, ex parte inquiry was initiated against the applicant and finally, the inquiry report along with the show- cause notice sent to the applicant and thereafter the impugned order of dismissal was passed.

[Ram Kali Mishra and ors. v. Union of India and others, CAT, Lucknow Bench, 2002 (2) SLJ (CAT).)

Unauthorized absence without proper medical certificate for about 13 years - No objection can be raised against penalty

It thus appears that the applicant was absenting since 1970. Even though he claims to have joined in 1972, there is no proof on the records in this regard. This point was discussed in the inquiry report and also in the order of the disciplinary authority. He has also claimed to have submitted some letters arid medical certificates, but the respondents have denied to have received the same. However, the applicant was charge sheeted only in the year 1988 and the inquiry was started thereafter. Till then the applicant was treated to be in the roll of the Railway and as such he was always shown to be on sick leave even though no formal leave was sanctioned to him. In the seniority list also his name was appearing for the simple reason that he was still considered to be an employee of the Railway as not removed from service in the meantime. There is no infirmity in this action of the respondents in treating him as on long leave or sick leave while admittedly at the initial stage he went on leave by declaring himself as sick. The applicant cannot take this advantage of these documents to contend that he was on leave on proper authority. In any event, as per the Railway Establishment Code, a Railway employee cannot remain on leave for more than 5 years at a stretch. It is also provided In the said code that the authorities were within their rights not to accept any medical certificate issued by a private medical practitioner if the leave exceeds 3 days. There is a Railway Board decision of 1972 below Rule 521 in respect of grant of leave on medical Certificate to Group 'C' and Group 'D' employees to the following effect:

"With a view to preventing misuse the Railway Administration may withdraw by specified period from 1st April to 30th June from 1st October to 15th November during Dewali and when mass sick reporting is contemplated by staff of any department, the privilege of acceptance of medical certificate from registered medical practitioners for grant of medical certificate to Group 'C' and Group 'D' Railway servants."

It is the contention of the applicant that when in 1985 he wanted to join he was not allowed to do so. He stated to have submitted a medical certificate issued by a private medical practitioner in support of his sickness as already mentioned above. The said certificate covered only a period of two years. As already stated above, under Rule 510 of the IRPC, no Railway servant can be granted leave on any account for a continuous period exceeding five years unless the President determines otherwise in exceptional circumstances. Similarly, the Railway Manual also provides that if the absence is more than 4 days, medical certificate from Railway Medical Officer is mandatory. In the instant case, the applicant was absent up to 1985 (according to him) for long 13 years and without any proper medical certificate. Therefore, the applicant could not have been allowed to join without the sanction of the competent authority. Moreover, he was already intimated that he was on unauthorised leave and repeated requests from the department to produce proper medical certificate was not complied with. In such circumstances, the applicant cannot claim the benefit of his name being in the seniority list or in the alleged sick list. [Phuleswar Prasad Verma v. Union of India & ors., CAT, Calcutta Bench, 2003 (3) SLJ (CAT)]

GOVERNMENT INSTRUCTIONS ON ODISHA LEAVE RULES

1. Drawal of leave salary during the period of leave availed by Government Servants and clarification thereof: As per Rule 164 of the Odisha Service Code, "subject to the condition in Rule 156, 157, 159, 163, 165, 166, 167 and 168 a Government servant on leave shall, during leave, drawn leave salary".

2. Representations have been received from various quarters regarding financial constraints faced by the Government employees due to non- disbursement of their leave salary during the period of leave as the sanction of leave is not made when the employee is allowed to proceed on leave. In most instances, the sanction of leave is made only on the joining of duty after availing leave. This leads to non-drawal of leave salary during the period the employee is on leave.

3. It is, therefore, reiterated that the sanction of leave should invariably be made before the employee proceeds on leave. Further, leave salary as due should be drawn on sanction of leave. No. 37473/F, Dt. 01.12.2018 (Tuhin Kanta Pandey)

Additional Chief Secretary to Government

2. Admissibility of Maternity Leave to female Govt. Servants and clarification thereof: As per Rule-194 (c) of Odisha Service Code "leave salary during such leave shall be equal to the pay drawn by the Government servant concerned at the time of taking leave".

2. Representations have been received from various quarters regarding financial constraints faced by the female Government employees due to non-disbursement of their leave salary during the period of maternity leave as the sanction of leave is not made when the employee is allowed to proceed on maternity leave. The sanction of leave is made only on the joining of duty after availing leave. This leads to non-drawal of leave salary during the period the employee is on maternity leave.

3. It is, therefore, reiterated that the sanction of leave should invariably be made before the female Government employee proceeds on maternity leave. Further, leave salary as due should be drawn on sanction of leave.

No. 37478/F, Dt. 01.12.2018

(Tuhin Kanta Pandey)

Additional Chief Secretary to Government

3. Payment of Cash equivalent of Unutilised Leave Salary to Government Servants in Case of death in Service, retirement on superannuation, voluntary retirement etc. Clarification regarding: The benefit of cash equivalent of Unutilised Leave Salary is admissible to Government Servants in case of death in service, retirement on superannuation, voluntary retirement etc. subject to conditions prescribed under the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966.

In Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 46545/F., dt.17.12.1991, it has been clarified that the authority competent to grant leave may, in case of Government Servant who ceases to be in Government Service by death / retirement or otherwise and for which the benefit of cash payment in lieu of unutilised leave is permissible, withhold whole or part of the cash equivalent of unutilised leave salary if in the opinion of such authority there is a possibility of some money becoming recoverable from him/her on conclusion of the disciplinary / criminal proceedings against him/her or on regularization of the period of suspension during service. On conclusion of the proceedings or the regularization of the period of suspension, such a Govt. servant will, however, become eligible to the amount so withheld after adjustment of Government dues, if any.

In-spite of that, proposals have been received from different quarters regarding admissibility of encashment of leave salary and powers of the leave sanctioning authority to withhold whole or part of cash equivalent of unutilised leave salary if there is a possibility of some money becoming recoverable from the Government Servant before or after retirernent.

After careful consideration Government have been pleased to clarify as follows:-

(1) If there is departmental/judicial proceeding pending against the Government servant as on the date of retirement which in the opinion of the leave sanctioning authority will culminate a recovery to be effected, such amount may be withheld from the leave salary..

(ii) In case a period of suspension during his employment in Government has not been decided and the regularization of the suspension period in the opinion of the Leave Sanctioning Authority will culminate a recovery to be effected, such amount may be withheld from the leave salary.

(iii) In case no departmental/judicial proceeding is pending against a Government servant on the date of retirement or no undecided suspension period is pending against him, then the cash payment in lieu of unutilised leave salary should be released.

No. 7493/F., Dt. 26.03.2015

Special Secretary to Government

4. Enforcement of bond executed by Govt. employees (while proceeding on leave for undertaking higher study/training inside and outside state) - Relaxation in specific cases: 1. In pursuance of Finance Department Memo No. 6874, Dt. 20.12.1996, Government employees are executing bond to ensure their continued employment in State Government for a period of five years bond period on completion of study leave/training.

2. The bond amount is calculated on the basis of prescribed formula as mentioned in the aforesaid Memo. In case, a Govt. servant after availing study leave/training does not return to duty or does not complete the prescribed period of five years in service after training he is liable to refund the bond amount along with interest thereon.

3. While operating above provisions, hardships has been faced by the Government servant especially when they secured Job opportunity in Government of India/State PSUs/State Autonomous bodles/Universities with Substantial State Govt. funding before completing mandatory bond period.

4. Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs vide OM No. 70/10/60-Estt. (A), Dt. 09.05.1960 and OM No. F.5/10/66-Estt. (C), Dt. 15.04.1966 have decided that the terms of the bond may not be enforced in case of Government servants who leave Government service before completion of the bond period to secure employment under a State Government, a Public Sector Undertaking owned wholly or partly by the Central Government or by a State Government or under quasi-Govt. organization and a fresh bond should be taken from such Govt. servant to ensure that they serve the new employer for the remainder period.

5. Considering the above provisions made by the Central Government the State Government, after careful consideration, have been pleased to decide that the terms of the bond shall not be enforced if the State Government servants, who prosecuted higher study availing study leave/ training, secure a job in Government of India/State Public Sector Undertakings/State Autonomous Bodies/Universities with Substantial State Govt. Funding before completion of the compulsory bond period:

Provided that they have to execute a fresh bond with the State Government for serving in the Government of India/State Public Sector Undertakings/State Autonomous Bodies/Universities with substantial State Government Funding for the remaining period of the original bond.

6. In case, the said Government servant fails to serve for the remaining period under the new employer, the entire amount prescribed in the original bond along with the interest thereon shall be refunded by such Government servant to the State Government. The new establishment will be requested to inform the concerned Administrative Department of the State Government regarding completion of the remainder period of the bond.

7. The above relaxation will not be applicable to the doctors serving under the State Govt. in allopathy stream.

8. There are two types of Government servants, viz. permanent and temporary, to execute such bonds and therefore two types of bond are required to be executed. In case of permanent Government servant no surety is required; Whereas in case of temporary Government servant two sureties are required.

9. Two sets of model bonds forms (copies enclosed), one for permanent and other for temporary Government servants have been prescribed for execution by the Officer before they are relieved to join their new assignment under Government of India/State Public Sector Undertakings/State Autonomous bodies/Universities with substantial State Government Funding.

10. The conditions of the original bond shall be applicable mutatis mutandis to the fresh bond.

11. This shall come into force with effect from the date of issue.

BOND FOR A TEMPORARY GOVERNMENT SERVANT WHO, AFTER RETURNING FROM STUDY LEAVE/TRAINING, SECURE A JOB IN GOVERNMENT OF INDIA/STATE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS/STATE AUTONOMOUS BODIES UNIVERSITIES WITH SUBSTANTIAL STATE GOVT. FUNDING BEFORE COMPLETION OF THE BOND PERIOD

KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS THAT WE ................resident of ................ in the district of ............... at present employed as ............... in the Office/ Deptt. of............... (hereinafter called "theprincipal obligor") and Shri/Smt............... son/daughter of............... resident of............... in the district of............... at present employed as ............... in the office/Deptt. of ............... (hereafter called "the 1st Surety") and Shri/Smt............... son/daughter of ................ resident of ............... in the district of  ............... at present employed as ............... ("hereinafter called the 2nd Surety") do hereby jointly and severally bind ourselves and our heirs, executors, administrators and legal representative to act in accordance with the following conditions namely -

WHEREAS the principal obligor Sri/Smt. ............... after returning for the study leave/training has served the state Government for a period of............... (years/months/days) only against the bond period of ............... years (as per the terms and conditions of the Bond executed by him/her on ...............)

AND WHEREAS the principal obligor has been selected for the post of ............... under ............... (Govt. of India/State Public Sector undertaking/State Autonomous Bodies/Universities with substantial Government Funding) and shall be liable to serve the said establishment at least for the remainder period of ............... (years/months/days) as ..... per the stipulations of FDOM No. ................... /F, Dt................

NOW THEREFORE CONDITION OF THE ABOVE WRITTEN OBLIGATION is that in the event of the bounden Sri/ Smt. .............................. failing to resume duty or resigning or retiring from service or remaining on unauthorised absence without obtaining previous sanction in writing from the new employer, the principal obligor and the sureties shall the forthwith refund to the Government of Odisha, hereinafter referred to as the Government as may be directed by the Government on demand all moneys paid to the principal obligor or expended/to be expended on account of pay and allowance, leave salary, cost of fees, travelling and other expenses, as the case may be, which amount for the purpose these presents shall be taken to be the sum of Rs. ...............(Rupees .................) on account of the principal obligor having been placed on study leave, higher study on leave granted as aforesaid together with the interest thereon from the date of demand at Govt. rates for the time being in force on Government loans.

AND UPON the principal obligor Sri/Smt ............... and/or Sri/Smt ............... and/or Sri/Smt. ............... the sureties as aforesaid making such refund, in full force and virtue and it is agreed and declared by the principal obligor and the sureties that in the event of default without prejudice to other remedies that the Govt. may adopt, the Govt. shall be entitled to recover the aforesaid amounts from the principal obligor and the sureties jointly and severally as a public demand under the Odisha Public Demands Recovery Act, 1962:

PROVIDED that the liability of the sureties herein shall not be impaired or discharged by reason of time being granted by the Government or by any forbearance, act or omission on the part of the Government or any person authorised by them (wherever with or without the consent or knowledge of the sureties) nor shall be it necessary for the Government to sue the said principal obligor before suing the above bounden sureties) nor shall be it necessary for the Government to sue the said principal obligor before suing the above bounden sureties Sri/Smt. .............................. and Sri/Smt. .............................. or any of them for the amount due herein. 

IN WITNESSES to the above written bond and to all terms and conditions herein before contained we have signed hereunder this ............... day of............... 20................

Signed and delivered by the above principal obligor

Witness - (1)

(2)

In the presence of witness - (1)
 (2)

Sri/Smt................

Signed and delivered by the 1st Surety above named 
Sri/Smt. ...............
Signed and delivered by the 2nd Surety above named

ACCEPTED
For and on behalf of the Government of Odisha

BOND FOR A TEMPORARY GOVERNMENT SERVANT WHO, AFTER RETURNING FROM STUDY LEAVE/TRAINING, SECURE A JOB IN GOVERNMENT OF INDIA/STATE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS/STATE AUTONOMOUS BODIES/UNIVERSITIES WITH SUBSTANTIAL STATE GOVT. FUNDING BEFORE COMPLETION OF THE BOND PERIOD

KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS THAT I resident of............... in the district of ...............at present  employed as............... in the Office/ Deptt. of ............... (hereinafter called "the principal obligor") do hereby myself and my heirs, executors, administrators and legal representatives to act in accordance with by the following conditions namely -

WHEREAS the principal obligor Sri/Smt. after returning for the study leave/training has served the state Government for a period of ............... (years/months/days) only against the bond period of ...............years (as per the terms and conditions of the Bond executed by him/her on .. ........)

AND WHEREAS the principal obligor has been selected for the post of undertaking/State Autonomous Bodies/Universities with substantial Government Funding) and shall be liable to serve the said establishment at least for the remainder period of ............... (years/months/days) as per the stipulations of FDOM No. ................/F, Dt................

NOW THEREFORE CONDITION OF THE ABOVE WRITTEN OBLIGATION is that in the event of the bounden obligor failing to resume duty or resigning or retiring from service or remaining on unauthorised absence without obtaining previous sanction in writing from the new employer, the obligor shall forthwith refund to the Government of Odisha, hereinafter referred to as the Government as may be directed by the Government on demand all moneys paid to the principal obligor or expended/to be expended on account of pay and allowance, leave salary, cost of fees, travelling and other expenses, as the case may be, which amount for the purpose these presents shall be taken to be the sum of Rs................ (Rupees ...........) on account of the principal obligor having been placed on study leave, higher study on leave granted as aforesaid together with the interest thereon from the date of demand at Government rates for the time being in force on Government loans. 

AND UPON the obligor as aforesaid making such refund, the above written obligation shall be void and no effect, otherwise it shall be and remain in full force by virtue and it is agreed and declared by the obligor that in the event of default without prejudice to other remedies that the Government may adopt, the Govt. shall be entitled to recover the aforesaid amounts from the principal obligor as a public demand under the Odisha Public Demands Recovery Act, 1962:

IN WITNESSES to the written bond and to all terms and conditions herein before contained we have signed hereunder this............... day of...............20...............

 Signed and delivered by the obligor

In the presence of Witness - (1)
(2)

ACCEPTED

For and on behalf of the Government of Odisha

FDOM No. 8518/F., Dt. 30.03.2017

5. Admissibility of Child adoption leave to female contractual employee engaged in Government establishment : As per FD Circular No. 39847(225), Dt. 01.10.2007 read with FD Circular No. 12383(225), Dt. 31.03.2012 all female employees engaged in Govt. establishment on contract basis with consolidated remuneration shall be eligible for maternity leave for a period of 180 days subject to condition that tenure of maternity leave will be within the contractual period in maximum.

2. After careful consideration Govt. have beern pleased to extend the benefits of child adoption leave for a period of 180 days to all the female employees engaged in Govt. establishment on contract basis with consolidated remuneration at par with the regular female Govt. servants subject to following conditions.

(i) The child adoption leave shall be admissable to female contractual employees for a period or 180 days, on adoption of a child up to one year of age in line with maternity leave as admissible to regular female Government employees.

(ii) The facility shall not be admissible to an adoptive mother already having two surviving children at the time of adoption.

(ili) Child adoption leave shall not be debited against the leave account. (iv) The application for leave shall be supported by the legal deed of adoption and the certificate of birth from the competent authority.

3. Contractual employees appointed against the sanctioned posts following due recruitment procedure and ORV Act in terms of G.A. Deptt. Resolution No. 4591/Gen, Dt. 15.02.2014, Resolution No. 26108/ Geen, Dt. 17.09.2013 and Resolution No. 1066/Gen, Dt. 16.01.2014 and in similar cases appointed on specific Government orders with concurrerice of Finance Deptt. will be treated at par with regular employees. The aforesaid categories of female contractual employees will be entitled to avail child adoption leave upto 180 days as extended to the regular female Govt. servants irrespective of their contractual period and there will be no interruption of service.

4. In case of female contractual employees appointed not against any sanctioned post and/or without following recruitment procedure and/ or ORV Act. then her child adoption leave is limited to the contractual period in maximum. However persons engaged for purely temporary schemes and short term duration or less than a year will not be eligible for child adoption leave.

5. Female contractual employees engaged on outsourcing basis through service providing agencies are not entitled to avail child adoption leave as there is no employee and employer relationship between the employee and Government in such engagements.

6. This shall be effective from the date of issue.

FDOM No. 31059/F., Dt. 18.11.2016

6. Admissibility of child adoption leave to female Govt. employees: Maternity leave of a female Government employee has been enhanced to 180 days by the State Govt. vide Finance Department OM No. 51856/F., Dt. 07.12.2011 following recommendations of Sixth Central Pay Commission.

2. Govt. or India vide DOPT OM No. 13018/4/89-Estt., Dt. 25.10.1989 have made provision for grant of leave to female Govt. servants on adoption of the child upto one year of age on the lines of maternity leave admissible natural mothers. Presently, the benefit has been enhanced to 180 days vide OM No. 13018/1/2009, Dt. 22.07.2009 of DOPT.

3. Proposal and representations from different quarters have been received for grant of child adoption leave to State Government employees to enable adoptive parents to avail leave similar to maternity leave.

4. Govt. after careful consideration have bene pleased to decide that female Govt. employees shall be entitled for adoption leave for proper care of adoptee for a period of 180 days subject to following conditions:

(i) The child adoption leave shall be admissible to female Government employees for a period of 180 days, on adoption of a child upto one year of age in line with maternity leave as admissible to natural mothers.

(ii) The facility shall not be admissible to an adoptive mother already having two surviving children at the time of adoption.

(iii) Child adoption leave shall not be debited against the leave account.

(iv) During the period of child adoption leave, she shall be paid leave salary equal to the pay drawn immediately before proceeding on leave.

(v) The application for leave shall be supported by the legal deed of adoption and the certificate of birth from the competent authority.

(vi) Child adoption leave shall be granted by the authority empowered to grant ordinary leave Government servant concerned. Besides, Head of office is competent to grant maternity leave as enhanced from time to time to the female Government servant working his/ her administrative control. However, FDOM No. 12598/F., Dt. 28.03.2011 will continue to guide sanction of other kinds of leave.

5. This shall be effective from the date of issue.

FDOM No. 31056/F., Dt. 18.11.2016

7. Absence form duty on Maternity ground by Female Contractual Employees engaged in different Departments of Government: All Female employees engaged in Government Establishment on Contract basis with consolidated remuneration and having less than two surviving children are be eligible to get full consolidated remuneration for a period not exceeding 90 (ninety) days of her absence form duty on maternity ground in terms of Finance Deptt. Circular No. 39847/F., Dt. 01.10.2007 on certain conditions outlined therein.

Govt. have enhanced the ceiling of 90 (ninety) days of maternity leave provided under sub-rule (b) of Rule 194 of Orissa Service Code to 180 days in FDOM No. 51856/F., Dt. 07:12.2011 in respect of State Govt. employees.

After careful consideration Govt. have been pleased to decide that in respect of all female employees engaged in Government establishment on contract basis with consolidated remuneration the existing ceiling of 90 days of absence from duty on maternity ground is enhanced to 180 days subject to condition that the tenure of maternity leave will be within the contractual period in maximum.

All other conditions outlined in FD Circular No. 39847/F., Dt. 01.10.2007 will remain unchanged.

This shall be effect from 1st April, 2012.

F.D. No. 12383(225)/F., Dt. 31.03.2012

8. Entitlement of Contractual appointees to Casual Leave: Persons engaged on contractual basis and guided by FDOM No. 40545/F., Dt. 29.08.2009 are extended with the following benefits:

(i) Contractual employees shall be eligible (subject to exigencies of public service) for special leave of 10 days at the maximum during the period of engagement for one year. The leave will not be carried over to the next year and will lapse on completion of each year of service.

(ii) Unauthorised absence for a continuous period of 15 days or more will automatically terminate his/her engagement.

(iii) Female contractual employees, who are married and have less than two surviving children, would be eligible to get the benefit of "absence from duty" on matemity ground in terms of Finance Department Circular No. 12383/F., Dt. 31.03.2012.

2. It is, however, clarified that persons engaged through outsourcing shall be guided by the terms and conditions in the agreement between the employer and the service provider. FDOM No. 23689/F., Dt. 23.06.2012

9. Entitlement of Earned Leave in case of Government servants serving in Departments other than vacation Departments: Consequent upon suspension of encashment of surrender leave benefits the upper limit of credit and encashment of unutilized Earned leave of a Government servant at the time of retirement was enhanced from 240 days to 300 days in FDOM No. 45493/F, Dt. 27.09.2002: Accordingly, the maximum limit of accumulation of Earned Leave admissible to a Government servant was enhanced to 300 days w.e.f. 01.07.2002 in FDOM No. 7351/F., dated 19.02.2003.

2. In view of the aforesaid enhancement Government, after careful consideration have been pleased to decide that the procedure with regard to maintenance of Leave Account of a Government servant serving in a Department (other than vacation Department) laid down in FDOM No. 20584/F., Dt. 17.05.1995 may be resorted to in the cases where the Earned Leave at the credit of the Government servant on the last day of December or June is 300 days (instead of 240 days) or less but more than 285 days (instead of 225 days).

3. This instructions shall take effect from 1st July, 2002.

4. Necessary amendment of relevant provisions of Orissa Leave Rules, 1966 shall be made in due course separately.

FD No. 10450/F., Dt. 14.03.2011

10. Admissibility of Maternity Leave to female Govt.

Servants: Consequent upon the recommendations of Sixth Central Pay Commission relating to maternity leave of a Government employe and the relevant Office Memorandum No. 13018/2/2008, Dtd. 11.9.2008 in the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension [DoPT], Govt. of India, the State Govt. after careful consideration have been pleased to decide that the existing limit of 90 days as per the provisions of Rule 194 of the Odisha Service Code will be modified as follows:

(i) The existing ceiling of 90 days maternity leave provided under sub- rule (b) of Rule 194 of Odisha Service Code is enhanced to 180 days.

(ii) This shall take effect from 1st December, 2011.

(iii) In view of paragraph (ii) above, a women employee in whose case the period of 90 days of maternity leave has not expired on the aforesaid date shall be entitled to the modified maternity leave of 180 days.
Necessary amendments to the relevant provisions of Odisha Service Code will be made to the above extent in due course.

O.M. No. 51856/F., Dt. 07.12.2011

11. Admissibility of Paternity Leave to male Govt. Servants: The AIS (Leave) Rules, 1955 as well as CCS (Leave) Rules provide for Paternity Leave to a male member of the service with less than two surviving children for a period of 15 days during the confinement of his wife for child birth. Keeping this in view, the State Govt. have been pleased to extend similar benefit to the employees of State Govt.

(1) A male member of the State Govt. service with less than two surving children can avail paternity leave for a period of 15 days during the confinement of his wife for child birth, i.e. upto 15 days or upto six months from the date of delivery of the child.

(ii) During such period of 15 days, he shall be paid leave salary equal to the pay drawn immediately before proceeding on leave.

(iii) The paternity leave may be combined with leave of any other kind.

(iv) The paternity leave shall not be debited against the leave account.

(v) If paternity leave is not availed of within the period as specified in para (i) above, such leae shall be treated as lapsed.

Note: The paternity leave shall not normally be refused under any circumstances except in case of exigencies of service of the employee as decided by the Government from time to time.

2. Necessary insertions of the aforementioned provision under the relevant rules of Odisha Service Code shall be made in due course.

Ο.Μ. No. 51861/F., Dt. 07.12.2011

12. Admissibility of Earned Leave: It has been decided by the Government in Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 45439/F., dated 27.09.2002 to enhance the upper limit of encashment of un-utilised Earned Leave from 240 days to 300 days w.e.f. 30.09.2002. In order to implement the above decision of Government, it is felt that the accumulation limit of Earned Leave of 240 days now admissible to a Government servant vide Para-4 (a) of Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 55423/F.. dated 14.11.1986, needs to be enhanced to 300 days.

2. After careful consideration, Government, in modification of Para 4 of Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 45439/F., dated 27.9.2002, have been pleased to decide that the existing maximum limit of accumulation of Earned Leave as fixed in Para-4 (a) of the Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 55423/F., dated 14.11.86, is enhanced to 300 days. All other conditions in the said O.M. remain unaltered subject to further condition that the maximum limit of 120 days appearing under Para 4 (c) is enhanced to 150 days.

3. This order shall take effect from 1st July, 02.

4. Formal amendment to Odisha Service Code & Odisha Leave Rules 1966 will be issued in due course.

5. In order to make more clear about the above provisions, the following illustration may be taken into account by all concerned.

ILLUSTRATION

That maximum limit of encashment of unutilised E.L. in respect of different categories of cases as enumerated in Para-4 (b) of the F.D.O.M. No. 55423/F., dated 14.11.86 is limited to -

248 days (240+8 days from July, 02 to Sept. 02) by 30.09.02 250 days (240 + 10 days from July, 02 to Oct. 02) by 31.10.02

253 days (240 + 13 days from July, 02 to Nov. 02) by 30.11.02 255 days (240 + 15 days from July, 02 to Dec. 02) by 31.12.02 258 days (240 + 18 days from July, 02 to Jan. 03) by 31.01.03 & so on (F.D. No. CS-II-32/2002-7351/F., Dt. 19.02.2003)

13. Admissibility of Maternity Leave: Consequent upon the recommendations of Sixth Central Pay Commission relating to maternity leave of a Government employe and the relevant Office Memorandum No. 13018/2/2008, Dtd. 11.9.2008 in the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension [DoPT], Government of India, the State Government after careful consideration have been pleased to decide that the existing limit of 90 days as per the provisions of Rule 194 of the Odisha Service Code will be modified as follows:

(i) The existing ceiling of 90 days maternity leave provided under sub- rule (b) of Rule 194 of Odisha Service Code is enhanced to 180 days.

(ii) This shall take effect from 1st December, 2011.

(iii) In view of paragraph (ii) above, a women employee in whose case the period of 90 days of maternity leave has not expired on the aforesaid date shall be entitled to the modified maternity leave of 180 days.

Necessary amendments to the relevant provisions of Odisha Service Code will be made to the above extent in due course (Ο.Μ. No. 51856/F., Dt. 07.12.2011)

14. Admissibility of Paternity Leave: The AIS (Leave) Rules,

1955 as well as CCS (Leave) Rules provide for Paternity Leave to a male member of the service with less than two surviving children for a period of 15 days during the confinement of his wife for child birth. Keeping this in view, the State Govt. have been pleased to extend similar benefit to the employees of State Govt.

(1) A male member of the State Government service with less than two surving children can avail paternity leave for a period of 15 days during the confinement of his wife for child birth, i.e. upto 15 days or upto six months from the date of delivery of the child.

(ii) During such period of 15 days, he shall be paid leave salary equal to the pay drawn immediately before proceeding on leave.

(iii) The paternity leave may be combined with leave of any other kind.

(iv) The paternity leave shall not be debited against the leave account.

(v) If paternity leave is not availed of within the period as specified in para (i) above, such leae shall be treated as lapsed.

Note: The paternity leave shall not normally be refused under any circumstances except in case of exigencies of service of the employee as decided by the Government from time to time.

2. Necessary insertions of the aforementioned provision under the relevant rules of Odisha Service Code shall be made in due course. (O.M. No. 51861/F, Dt. 07.12.2011)

15. Benefit of leave to the teachers transferred to serve under local bodies: Teachers transferred in the ordinary way from the control of Government to serve under local bodies along with the schools in which they were serving should be allowed to avail themselves of the leave earned in Government service prior to their transfer after they are retransferred to Government service. They are also entitled to avail themselves of the leave earned for service under local bodies in the event of their being transferred to Government. The leave salary of such officers will be met from the provincial revenue.

(B.&O. Deptt. No. 7525/E., dated the 20th March, 1935)

16. Leave for undergoing training in the Odisha Flying Club: In order to encourage flying among Govt. servants, Govt. of Odisha have been pleased to decide as follows

1. Permanent Government servants in superior service belonging to non-vacation departments intending to learn flying at the Odisha Flying Club, Bhubaneswar will be eligible to avail of leave for a period not exceeding 30 days. Leave salary during such leave will be equal to half average pay as defined in Rule 10 of the Odisha Service Code subject to the maximum laid down in Rule 166 of the said Code or its equivalent under Rule 25 (b) of the Odisha Leave Rules according as the Government servant concerned is subject to the leave rules in Chapter VI of the Odisha Service Code or in the Odisha Leave Rules, 1939.

2. This leave will not be debited to the leave accounts of such Government servants.

3. Individual cases where the above concession are not admissible will be judged on their own merit.

4. Government servants belonging to Vacation Department may learn flying in Odisha Flying Club during the period of vacation. (Planning & Reconstruction Deptt. No. 807/PR., Dt. 21.02.1949)

17. Leave in India: It has been decided that since in the case of an officer placed deputation in interruption of leave out of India, leave is treated as one spell of leave, the leave before and after the period of deputation should be treated as initial period for the purpose of Rule 168 (b) (i) of the Odisha Service Code and the Government servant allowed to draw, if he so desires, leave salary in India for the portion of leave immediately following the deputation. As deputation is duty for all purposes it should not be taken into account in calculating the maximum period of 4 months prescribed in Rule 168 of the Service Code.

(Home Deptt. No. 6596/A., dated the 2nd August, 1939)

18. Study leave in America: The Govt. of Odisha have decided that the duties and functions entrusted to the High Commissioner for India in the United Kingdom under the Study Leave Rules contained in Chapter VI of the Odisha Service Code shall hence forward be performed by His Excellency the Ambassador for India in Washington in regard to Govt. servants on study leave in America.

(F.D. No. 11592/F., dated 17th August 1949)

19. Prefixing and suffixing of holidays of leave: The undersigned is directed to say that it has been considered necessary to issue a specific clarification as to whether holidays can be both prefixed and affixed to leave, in view of some doubts that seem to have arisen on this point.

2. Rule 139 of the Odisha Service Code specifically provides that officers of the Vacation Department cannot both prefix and suffix vacation to leave. As for the other officers, Rule 138 (a) and Rule 138 (b) deal respectively with the prefixing and suffixing of holidays to leave. There has been some doubts as to what the term 'affix' means. While the dictionary meaning of the term is 'to add' the word seems to have been used in its restrictive connotation 'to add at the end' in the Odisha Service Code.

There is no specific limitation on both prefixing and suffixing of holidays to leave or leave to holidays. It is obvious from the meaning of Rule 137 (e) and (f) that both suffixing and prefixing holidays to leave would be permissible if the conditions prescribed in Rules 138 (a) and 138 (b) of Odisha Service Code are satisfied. But while both prefixing and suffixing of holidays to leave are permissible, holiday cannot intervene between two spell of leave and the entire period of absence in such circumstances shall be treated as leave.

(F.D. No. 22014/F., dated the 6th July, 1960)

20. Study leave to be sanctioned only where the course of study/training is in the interest of the State General principle:

The undersigned is directed to invite a reference to this Department Memo No. 4392/F., dated the 18th March, 1954, and No. 1401/F., dated the 31st January, 1952, on the subject noted above and to say that the position relating to the grant of study leave has been further reviewed by Government on the basis of decision taken in the meeting of the State Development & Co-ordination Committee held on 3rd January, 1954. After careful consideration, Government have been pleased to re-affirm the general principle already laid down that study leave can be granted to Government servants only when the course of study or training is demonstrably in the interest of the State or in the other words; when the knowledge or experience gained as a result is necessary for the execution of the various development schemes of the improvement of administration.

2. It has been decided that study leave will be admissible even when a Government servant takes up such study/training inside India under the various training schemes of international agencies like Rockfeller Foundation, U.N.T.A., Colombo Plan, etc., where Government are required to sponsor the candidates under the rules relating to these schemes. Those who attend courses or training aboard under the above schemes would, however, continue to be covered by deputation, special leave terms laid down in the Finance Department Resolution No. 4170/F./., dated the 4th March, 1954.

3. It has further been decided that persons who proceed abroad on their own initiative without being sponsored specifically by Government under the schemes of international agencies or otherwise will also be eligible to the study leave concession subject to the general principles enunciated in paragraph (1) above.

4. It is noticed that the procedure laid down in Finance Department Memo No. 4392/F., dated the 8th March, 1954, regarding selection of candidates and subjects for specialised training under the study leave scheme is not being scrupulously followed by some of the Departments and permission is being granted in certain cases on their own authority without placing the matter before the State Development & Co-ordination Committee which has taken the place of Inter-Departmental Committee of Secretaries regarding suitability of the candidate. This practice is irregular and should be discontinued forthwith. All cases where proposal for grant of study leave are considered by Department of Government should be referred to the State Development & Co-ordination Committee and the procedure laid down in Finance Department Memo No. 4692/F., dated the 8th March, 1954, regarding selection of subjects and candidates should be strictly followed. The Political & Service (Planning) Department will be Administrative Department in this regard and deal with the specific cases of study leave. Before each case in finally sanctioned however the Finance Department will have to be consulted. (F.D. No. 16304/F., Dt. 20.04.1954)

21. Allowance for studies abroad during the periods of vacation: The undersigned is directed to invite a reference to Rule 188 of the Odisha Service Code according to which study allowance is admissible to Government servants undergoing studies abroad upto fourteen days for any period of vacation. It is understood that this restriction regarding admissibility of study allowance during the period of vacation has caused considerable hardship to State Government officers who are undergoing studies in foreign countries under study leave terms. Government have allowed to draw study allowance for the entire period vacation during the course of study subject to the condition that (i) he attends during vacation any special course of study or practical training, if so required by Government or other competent authority; and (ii) in the absence of any such direction, produces satisfactory evidence before the High Commissioner for India in the United Kingdom, or in the case of Government servants on study leave in America, the Ambassador for India in Washington that he has continued his studies during the vacation. No study allowance may, however, be drawn during a vacation falling at the end of course of study except for a maximum period of 14 days. The period of vacation during which study allowance is drawn shall be taken into account in calculating the maximum period of two years for which study allowance is admissible.

2. The following other decisions have also been taken in regard to the payment of study allowance:

(a) The certificates of attendance required to be submitted in support of claims for study allowance may be produced at the end of the term if a Government servant is undergoing study in an education institution, or at intervals not exceeding three months, if he is undergoing study at any other institution.

(b) Study allowance may be paid at the end of the every month provisionally, subject to an undertaking in writing being obtained from the Government servant that he would refund to Government any overpayment, consequent of his failure to produce the required certificate of attendance or otherwise

(c) If the Govt. servant resigns or retires from service without retuming to duty after a period of study leave or at any time within a period of five years after his return to duty, he will be required to refund the study allowance, cost of fees, travelling and other expenses drawn by him before his resignation is accepted or permission to retire is granted. The study leave already availed of by such a Govt. servant will be converted into regular leave to the extent of the regular leave, standing at his credit on the date on which study leave commenced, any regular leave taken in continuation of study leave being also suitably adjusted for the purpose. The balance of the period of study leave, if any, which cannot be so converted will be treated as extraordinary leave.

(Finance Deptt. No. 39745/F., dated 26th October, 1962)

22. Leave to Government servants for undertaking higher study/training: At present, State Government employees are deputed for higher study/training on terms and conditions set out in Finance Department Memo No. 59/F., dated 1.1.1966. At times enterprising Government servants take initiative to arrange for themselves Fellowship/ Scholarship in different institutions for similar purposes. Cases of such Government servants are normally regulated by grant of Study Leave. But, at times, these officers claim the same terms as are given to the Government servants deputed by the State Government. This gives rise to representation which becomes difficult to decide. After careful consideration of the matter and keeping in view the liberalised terms introduced by the Government of India in the matter in of grant of Study Leave, the Governor has been pleased to lay down the following revised principles to regulate grant of pay, leave, etc., to Government servants who undertake higher study/ training, whether inside India and abroad.

2. (a) Officers who are either sponsored by the State Government or nominated by Government of India for higher study/training will be treated as on deputation.

(b) To be sponsored by State Govt. for higher study/training the officers will have to be selected by the Departmental Screening Committee.

(c) In case Government of India nominate a State Government officer for a particular course/training or study and the State Govt. agree to spare him, he will be treated to have been deputed by the State Government.

(d) Officers treated as on deputation will be entitled to the full pay with Dearness Allowance as admissible while on duty before proceeding on deputation. Such a deputations may also be allowed any other facilities, Govt. may decide to allow in any particular case.

(e) In case of an officer sent on deputation for undertaking course of studies/training, extension of the period of deputation will not normally be allowed. If such an officer wishes to continue his studies/training in the Institution for a period beyond the period of deputation and his further study/training is considered useful in the interest useful in the interest of the State, he may be allowed to extend the period by taking leave due and admissible to him provided that the total period of absence of the officer from duty does not exceed 30 months.

3. (a) Where no initiate is taken by the State Government nor is there any nomination by the Government of India but the officer by his own efforts obtains Fellowship/Scholarship or only admission to any institution for undertaking higher study/training, he may be granted study leave provided the conditions laid down in the Odisha Service Code are satisfied and that the course of study/training is in approved course in a recognised institution and that such study/training is considered useful for improving the knowledge and skill of the officer in the fields of his work.

(b) The officer who is granted Study Leave for the purpose indicated above will be entitled to leave salary equal to the pay and Dearness Allowance admissible to him while on duty immediately before proceeding on Study Leave.

(c) In case the officer receives any Fellowship/Scholarship or any remuneration through part-time employment such amount will be adjusted against the leave salary payable subject to the condition that the balance of leave salary to be paid is not less than what is admissible during half-pay leave.

(d) He will not be entitled to any travelling allowance for journeys to and from the Institution.

(e) The journey time that will be required for joining the Institution and for returning from the Institution to the place of duty will be included in the period of Study Leave to be granted.

(f) The officer who is granted Study Leave may be allowed to continue the same study/training for a further period or undertake another course of study/training by taking leave due and admissible to him if such further study/training or such other study/training is considered useful in the interest of the State.

(g) In no case the period of Study Leave shall exceed two years in the entire service career of a Government servant nor shall the grant of Study Leave in combination with other kinds of leave except leave on medical certificate or Extraordinary Leave involve absence of the officer from duty for more than 30 months.

(h) No study allowance need be paid during Study Leave. (Finance Deptt. No. 22752/F., dated 1st May, 1979)

23. Leave for Government servants sponsored by the Government for training, vis a vis., leave for Government servants who secure Fellowship, etc., on their own initiative: In Finance Deptt. Memo No. 22752 dated 1.5.1979 principles have been laid down for grant of pay, leave etc., to Govt. servants undertaking higher study/ training in India and abroad. Difficulties are, however, still being experienced in some Deptt. in the application of these principles to cases involving deputation or Study Leave. The procedure to be followed in such cases is clarified below.

2. A distinction should be made between Government servants sponsored by the State Govt. or nominated by the Government of India for higher study/training and those who are not so sponsored or nominated but secure Fellowship/Scholarship/admission to institutions on their own initiative. Sanction of deputation/leave in the former case should be regulated by the stipulations of para 3 and in the latter by para 4 below.

3. (a) Government servants sponsored by the State Government or nominated by the Government of India for higher study/training should be treated as on deputation. Sponsoring should be only under programmes specifically by the Government and the sponsored candidates should be selected by a Departmental Committee.

(b) Government servants who are selected for deputation may be allowed full pay and deamess allowance admissible to them before proceeding on deputation. They may also be allowed such other facilities as Govt. may decide to grant.

(c) Extension of the period of deputation for study/training is ordinarily prohibited. A deputed Government servant intending to continue study/training beyond the period of deputation may however be allowed Study Leave due and admissible provided the study/training is considered useful in the interest of the State Government and the total period of absence from duty does not exceed 30 months.

4. (a) A Government servant who is not sponsored by the State Government nor nominated by the Government of India but secures a Fellowship/Scholarship/admission to an institution for higher study/training by his own initiative may be granted Study Leave due and admissible under the OSC provided the course of study/training is an approved course/training in a recognised institution and is considered useful for improving his knowledge and skill in the field of his work.

(b) A Government servant who is granted Study Leave will be entitled to leave salary equal to the pay and dearness allowance admissible to him while on duty immediately before proceeding on Study Leave.

(c) During Study Leave availed in India, payment of leave salary will be subject to furnishing a certificate by the Government servant that he is not in receipt of any Fellowship, scholarship, stipend or remuneration in respect of any part-time employment. Any such amount received during the period of Study Leave will be adjusted against the leave salary subject to the condition that the leave salary to be paid is not less than what is admissible during half-pay leave.

(d) A Government servant on Study Leave will not be entitled to any travelling allowance for journey to and from the institution or for other journeys performed for the purpose of study/training at the institution. 

(e) The journey time required for joining the institution and for retuming from the institution to the place of duty will be included in the period of Study Leave to be granted.

(f) A Government servant who is granted study leave may be allowed to continue the same study/training for a further period or undertake any other course of study/training by taking leave due and admissible to him if such study/training is considered useful in the interest of the State.

(g) The period of Study Leave shall not in any case exceed two years in the service career of the Government servant nor shall the total period of Study leave in combination with other kinds of leave on medical certificate or Extraordinary Leave involve his absence from the duty for more than thirty months.

(h) No study allowance will be paid during Study Leave. (Finance Deptt. No. 38447/F., dated the 29th July, 1980)

24. Extraordinary Leave either before commen-cement of the training or before resuming duties after training: Under Rule 13 (3) of the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966 a Government servant no in permanent employment may be granted during deputation on training Extraordinary Leave from the date of his relief till the date of resumption of duties on return from training subject to fulfillment of other conditions laid down in this rule. Doubts have arisen as to whether in cases where Govemment servant avails leave either before commencement of the training or before resuming duties under Government after return from training on ground of ill health will also be covered by Rule 13 (3) and the entire period treated as Extraordinary Leave.

(2) It is hereby clarified that the intention of Rule 13 (3) of O.L.R., 1966 is to specify the maximum period for which Extraordinary Leave can be granted to a temporary Government servant for the purpose of undergoing training and it is not intended to treat the entire period of absence from the date of relief till the date of resumption of duties as Extraordinary Leave. The leave of absence availed by Government servants on ground of illness before joining the training or after relief from training till resumption of duties may be regularised by grant of leave due and admissible. Such cases should be referred to Government and the authority sanctioning leave must satisfy himself that the grounds are genuine and that the concerned servant has furnished adequate proof in support of his illness. (F. D. No. 6828/F., dated the 12th February, 1982)

25. Deputation of Government servants for undergoing higher study/training: In Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 19230/F., dated the 6th May, 1988, it has been laid down that special allowance would be admissible to Government servants deputed on training being sponsored by State Government or nominated by Government of India. A question has been raised as to whether a Govemment servant, who is deputed to undergo higher study being sponsored by State Government or nominated by Government of India, will be entitled to get the special allowance during the period of higher study.
The matter has been carefully considered by Government and it is hereby clarified that the special allowance, as admissible in case of deputation on training, will also be admissible in case of deputation on higher study by treating the period of higher study as a course of instruction or training within the meaning of Rule 13 (b) (i) of the Odisha Service Code.

(F.D. No. 10869/F., dated the 25th March, 1991)

26. Grant of Extraordinary Leave of Scheduled Caste/Tribe employees for purpose of coaching at Pre-examination Training Centres: The question of allowing leave benefit to the Government servants belonging to the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes to improve their service prospects by getting coaching at Pre-examination Training Centres for competitive examinations notified by the Government from time to time, has been under consideration of Government for sometime past.

2. After careful consideration, it has been decided that Government employees belonging to the scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribe may, for the purpose of attending the Pre-examination Training Courses at the Centres notified by the Government from time to time, be granted Extraordinary Leave for the period of coaching in relaxation of the limit prescribed under Rule 13 (2) of Odisha Leave Rules, 1966.

(Finance Deptt. No. 8601/F., dated the 2nd March, 1985)

27. Counting the period of study leave for increments Clarifications: According to paragraph 4 (6) of Finance Department Ο.Μ. No. 88447/F., dated the 29th July, 1980, a Govt. servant who is granted study leave under Rule 179 of the Odisha Service Code is entitled to leave study equal to the pay and allowance admissible to him on duty immediately before proceeding on study leave. It has come to the notice of Finance Deptt. that a doubt has arisen at some quarters as to whether the period of study will be taken into account while sanctioning increments.

2. According to the provisions contained in Rule 79 (b) (iv) of the Odisha Service Code leave other than Extraordinary leave will count for increment. Since study leave comes under the category of leave other than Extraordinary leave, it is clarified that the period of study leave sanctioned under Rule 179 of the Odisha Service Code will be taken into account for sanctioning increment in a time-scale and normal increment as due will be sanctioned during study leave. (F.D. No. 8990., dtd. 12th March, 1985)

28. A further doubt has arisen at some quarters as to whether by virtue of sanction of increment during the period of study leave the concerned Government servant can draw the increment amount during the period of study leave.

2. It is hereby clarified that during the period of leave, the Government servant is entitled to only leave salary which is equal to pay and allowance drawn by him immediately before proceeding on study leave. So in case of study leave, the increment will be sanctioned from the date. But the finance benefit arising out the grant of increment including arrear incremental

expiry of study leave. (Finance Deptt. No. 2515/F., Dt. 17.07.1985)

29. A temporary Government servant may be granted E.O.L. for improving his professional knowledge at his own cast: Under Rule 13 (3) of the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966, a Govt. servant who has completed a minimum period of one year continuous service can be granted extraordinary leave during deputation on training subject to other conditions laid down therein. Doubts have arisen as to whether the above benefit can be extended in case of deputation of higher study to a Govt. servant who has competed a minimum period of one year continuous service.

2. It is hereby clarified that the intention of Rule 13 (3) of the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966, is to depute a temporary Government servant for improving his professional knowledge at his own cost. Hence, a Government who is deputed on higher study at his own cost of improve his professional efficiency may be treated at par with the officers deputed on training within the meaning of the above rule.

(F.D. No. 44134/F., dated the 30th November, 1991)

30. Study Leave for 3 years for Doctors of Health and F.W. Deptt. Rule 181 of the Odisha Service Code read with para 4 of the Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 3844-F., dated the 28th July, 1980, provide that the period of study leave shall not in any case exceed two years in the service career of the Government servant.

2. The above provision has been reviewed in case of the Doctors undergoing higher study and after careful consideration, Government have been pleased to decide that the study leave may be granted to the Doctors working under the Administrative Control of the H. & F.W. Department upto a maximum period of three years in the combination with other kinds of leave except leave on medical certificate or extraordinary leave, does not involve an absence from duty for more than 36 months.

3. The decision shall take effect from the date of issue of this order, Cases where study leave is continuing may be decided as per the above decision and cases study leave has already been availed shall not be reopened.

4. Necessary amendment to the Odisha Service Code will be made in due course. (F.D. No. 44751/F., dated the 16th November, 1995)

31. Execution of Bond by Officers undergoing study leave/ higher study on leave due and admissible inside and outside the State but within the country: The undersigned in directed to say that Government servants undergoing study leave/higher study on leave due and admissible are required to execute à Bond which ensures proper utilisation of their service on return from study leave for a minimum period of five years under the State Government. Two sets of model bond forms (copies enclosed) one for permanent and other for temporary Government servants have been prescribed for execution by Officers before they are relieved to undergo study leave/higher study on leave due and admissible. The bank space in the Bond relating to the amount to be recovered, should be filed up with double the sum that is likely to be expended in respect of the higher study of a candidate.

The Bonds are required to be compulsorily registered at the expenses of the candidate. Stamps Duty payable under article 15 of Schedule 1A of the Stamp Act will be charged in respect of bond prescribed for permanent Government servants and under article 57 of the above schedule from temporary Government servants.

It is requested that these instructions may kindly be given effect to strictly and the documents executed may be preserved by the concerned Administrative Deptt. (F.D. No. 6874/F., dated 20th February, 1996)

BOND FOR A TEMPORARY GOVT. SERVANT WHEN PROCEEDING ON STUDY LEAVE/HIGHER STUDY ON LEAVE DUE AND ADMISSIBLE INSIDE OR OUTSIDE THE STATE WITHIN THE COUNTRY

KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS THAT WE ............... in the district of ............... at present employed as ............... in the office/Department of ............... (hereinafter called "the principal obligor") and Shri/Smt............... son/daughter of............... resident of...............in the district of ............... at present employed as as ............... in the Office/ Department of  ............... and...............  Shri/Smt...............son/daughter ............... resident of ............... in the district of............... at present employed as ...............in the Office/ Department of............... (hereinafter called " the Surety") do hereby jointly and severally bind ourselves and our respective heirs executors and administrators and legal representative to pay to the Government of Odisha his successor and assigns (hereinafter called "the Government") on demand the amount of pay and allowances, leave salary, cost of fees, travelling and other expenses, as the case may be, which amount for the purpose of these presents shall be taken to be the sum of Rs ...............(Rupees) that the Government will incur on account of the principal obligor having been placed on study leave higher study on leave due and admissible under Rule 179 and 180 of the Odisha Service Code, read with F.D. O.M. No. 38447/F., dated the 29th July 1980 or under any other rules for the time being in force as amended at Govt. rates for the time being in force on Govt. loans or if payment is made in a country other than India the equivalent of the same amount in the currency of that country covered at the official rate of exchange between that country and India.

WHEREAS the above principal obligor is placed on study leave/ higher study on leave due and admissible by the Govt.

AND WHEREAS for better protection of the Govt. the principal obligor has agreed to execute his bond with such condition as hereunder written;

AND WHEREAS the said surety has agreed to execute this bond as surety on behalf of the above bounder (principal obligor) Shri/ Smt

NOW THE CONDITION OF THE ABOVE WRITTEN OBLIGATION is that in the event of the principal obligor Shri/ Smt failing to resume duty or resigning from service without returning to duty after expiry or termination of the period of study leave/higher study on leave due and admissible or at a time within a period of five years after his return to duty or in the event of his taking up the question of extension/variation of his higher study with the authorities responsible for higher study without obtaining previous sanction in writing from the Government, the principal obligor and the surety shall forthwith refund to the Govt. may be directed by the Govt. on demand all moneys paid to the principal obligor or expended/to be expended on account of the pay and allowance, leave salary, cost of fees, travelling and other expenses, as the case may be, which amount for the purposes of these presents shall be taken to be sum of Rs (Rupees ......) on account of the principal obligor having been placed on study leave/higher study on leave granted as aforesaid together with interest thereon from the date of demand at Government rates for the time being in force of Government loans.

AND UPON the principal obligor Shri/Smt Shri/Smt and/or Shri/Smt and/or the surety as aforesaid making such refund, the above written obligation shall be void and of no effect, otherwise it shall be and remain in full force and virtue and it is agreed and declared by the Principal Obligor and the surety that in the event of default without prejudice to other remedies that the Government may adopt, the Govt. shall be entitled to recover the aforesaid amounts from the principal obligor and the surety jointly and severally as a public demand under the Odisha Public Demand Recovery Act, 1962.

PROVIDED that the liability of the surety hereunder shall not be impaired or discharged by reason of time being granted by the Government or by any forbearance, act or omission on the part of the Government or any person authorised by them (wherever with or without the consent or knowledge of the surety) nor shall it be necessary for the Government to sue the said principal obligor before suing the above bounden surety Shri/Smt due hereunder. and Shri/Smt or any of them for amount

IN WITNESS to the above written bond and to all terms and conditions herein before contained we have signed hereunder this day of

Signed and delivered by the above principal obligor

Witness (1)

(2)

In the presence of witness (1)

(2)

Signed and delivered by the surety above named

Signed and delivered by the surety above named Shri/Smt.

ACCEPTED For and on behalf of the Government of Odisha

BOND FOR PERMANENT GOVT. SERVANT WHEN PROCEEDING ON STUDY LEAVE/HIGHER STUDY ON LEAVE DUE AND ADMISSIBLE INSIDE AND OUTSIDE THE STATE WITHIN THE COUNTRY

KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS THAT resident at present employed as in the district in the Office/ ..... (hereinafter called "the obligor") do hereby of Department of bind myself and my heirs, executors, administrators and legal representatives to pay to the Governor of Odisha, his successors or assigns (hereinafter called "the Government") on demand the amount expended/to be expended in respect of pay and allowance, leave salary, cost of fees, travelling and other expenses, as the case may be, which amount for the purpose of these present shall be taken to be the sum of Rs. (Rupees ............ on account of my having been placed on study leave/higher study of leave due and admissible under rules 179 and 180 of the Odisha Service Code read with F.D. O.M. No. 38447-F., dated the 29th July 1980 or any other rules for the time being in force, as amended from to time, together with interest thereon from the date of demand at Government rates for the time being in force on Government loans or if payment is made in a country other than India, the equivalent of the said amount in the currency of that country converted at the official rate of exchange that country and India.

WHEREAS the above bounden is, placed on study leave/higher study on leave due and admissible by Government.

AND WHEREAS for better protection of the Government I have agreed to execute this bond with such condition as hereunder written.

NOW THE CONDITION OF THE ABOVE WRITTEN OBLIGATION is that in the event of the above bounden Shri/Smt failing to resume duty by resigning or retiring from service or without returning to duty after the expiry or termination of the period of study leave/higher study on leave due and admissible or at any time within a period of five years after his return to duty or in the event of his taking up the question of extension/variation of his higher study with the authorities responsible for his higher study without obtaining previous sanction in writing from the Government he shall for with refund to the Government as may be directed by the Govt. n demand all moneys paid to him or expended/to by expended on his account in respect of the pay and allowance, leave salary, cost of fees travelling and other expenses, as the case may be, which amount for the purpose of these presents shall be taken to be the sum of Rs. (in words) on account of his having been placed on study leave, higher study on leave as aforesaid together with interest thereon from the date of demand at Govt. rates for the time being in force on Govt. loans:

AND UPON the above bounden Shri/Smt making such refund the above written obligation shall be void and of no effect otherwise it shall be and remain in full force and virtue and it is agreed and declared by the obligor that in the event of default, without prejudice to other remedies that the Government may adopt, the Government shall be entitled to recover the aforesaid amounts as a public demand under the Odisha Public Demands Act, 1962.

The obligor shall not on his own initiative on arrival or during his stay in the country of his higher study take up the question/variation of his higher study with the authorities responsible for his higher study:

PROVIDED that he shall have the right to approach his sanctioning authority for extension/variation of his higher study who after necessary consultation with the authorities concerned will decide and the decision taken shall be final, conclusive and binding or the obligor.

IN WITNESS to the above written bond to all terms and conditions signed this on............... day of...............

In the presence of Witness - (1)

(2)

Signature of the obligor accepted For and on behalf of the Government of Odisha

32. Execution of Bond by the officers undergoing study leave/higher study on leave due and admissible inside and outside the State but within the Country Clarification regarding: The undersigned is directed to say that as per para (2) of Finance Deptt. Circular No. 6874-F., dated the 20th February 1996, the officers undergoing study/higher study on leave due and admissible insde the Country are required to execute a Bond at their expense. A proposal for execution of Bonds by the officers without registration was under active consideration of Government.

After careful consideration, the Govt. have been pleased to decide in modification of para (2) of the above Circular that the Bonds so prescribed shall henceforth be executed without registration. The Bonds pending for execution on the date of issue of this order will also require no registration. The case already decide in terms of above Çircular shall not reopened for revision. (Finance Deptt. No. 18014/F., dated 15th April, 1998)

33. Maternity Leave counts for increment in temporary service: The undersigned is directed to say that the question of allowing Maternity Leave granted to temporary female Government servants under the provision of Rule 194 of the Odisha Service Code to count towards increment in temporary and officiating service have been engaging the attention of Government for some time past. After careful consideration, it has been decided that Maternity Leave granted to female Government servants under the Note below Rule 194 may be allowed to count for increments in the post in which the Government servant was officiating at the time of proceeding on such leave provided it is certified by the appointing authority that the Government servant concerned would have continued to officiate in that post but for proceeding on such leave. 
(F.D. No. 35146/F., dated the 30th November 1960) 

34. Certificate given by a private medical practitioner may be accepted in case of miscarriage (including abortion): In partial modification of the orders contained in sub-para (iii) of para, 1 of this Department Office Memo No. 15115/F., dated the 28th May, 1958, on the subject noted above, Government have been pleased to decide that in support of applications for grant of Maternity Leave on account of miscarriage (including abortion), the medical certificate granted by a private registered medical practitioner may be accepted.
The certificate of a Civil Surgeon or a Gazetted Medical Officer may, however, be called for in cases of doubt.

(F.D. No. 26950/F., dated the 5th August, 1961)

35. Maximum limit for Maternity Leave 90 days: The question of simplifying and rationalising the rules relating to admissibility of Maternity Leave to female Government servants was under consideration of Government for some time past. After careful consideration the Governor has been pleased to decide that the following modifications in Rule 194 of the Odisha Service Code may be made.

(i) Grant of Maternity Leave under sub-rule (b) of Rule 194 of the Odisha Service Code shall be for a period of 90 days from the date of its commencement in all cases, i.e., it shall not be restricted to six weeks from the date of confinement as at present.

(ii) Note below sub-rule (e) of the aforesaid rule may be treated as deleted. As a result, the female Government servants who have not rendered even one year's continuous service are also eligible for Maternity Leave under this rule.

(iii) Maternity Leave may also be granted in case of miscarriage, including abortion, subject to the conditions that -

(a) the leave does not exceed six weeks; and

(b) the application for leave is supported by a certificate as laid down in Rules. Abortion included under the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 should also be considered as a case of 'abortion' for the purpose of granting 'Maternity Leave' under the aforesaid rule.

(F.D. No. 63452/F., dated 13th December, 1977)

36. Female Government servant having less than two surviving children entitled to Maternity Leave: In terms of the provision of Rule 194 (f) of the Odisha Service Code (incorporated by Finance Department Notification No. 35913/F., dated 17.8.1984) no Maternity Leave is admissible to a female Govt. servant for the third and subsequent issues.

(2) The matter was under examination for sometime past and after careful consideration, the Governor has been pleased to decide in modification to the above provision that, Maternity Leave shall be granted to a female Government servant who is having less than two surviving children. (F.D. No. 42786/F., Dt. 18.10.1992)

37. Credit in the Leave Account of an officer serving in the Vacation Department: It has been brought to the notice of the Govt. that no uniformity is maintained in the matter of giving credit in the Leave Account of an officer serving in the Vacation Department when he proceeds on leave before completing a full year of duty. To bring uniformity in this regard it has now been decided that the following procedure should be followed in respect of officers governed under Rule 163 of Odisha Service Code, and Rule 4 of the Liberalisation of Leave Rules.

(i) When no vacation falls within the incomplete year of service the Government servant is entitled to leave earned at the rate of 1/11 during that period of duty as reduced by 1/12 of that period. The credit so afforded will be corrected suitably if later on it transpires that officer has availed of either proportionately or has not availed of at all the vacations which fell during the full year.

(ii) When vacation falls within the incomplete year but is partially enjoyed, the proportion 15 days, or 30 days, as the case may be, which should be deducted from the leave account is the proportion which the vacation actually enjoyed plus the vacation that will fall within the remaining period of twelve months bears to the whole period of vacations which fall within the period of twelve months.

(iii) When the vacation; falls within the incomplete year but is fully enjoyed, the fraction of 15 days or 30 days, as the case may be, which should be deducted from the leave account is the fraction which the period of duty including vacation bears to the whole period of duty (including vacation).

(2) The expression 'each year of duty' occurring in Rule 139 of Odisha Service Code, should be held as period of twelve months beginning on the date following the date on which he completed the previous year of duty and exclusive of leave. (F.D. No. 19102/F., dated the 20th May, 1961)

38. Payment of leave salary in advance: The undersigned is directed to say that Government have had under consideration the recommendation of the Pay Committee in paragraph 14 (2) of Chapter XVII of report that up to a month's leave salary may be allowed in advance to Government servants proceeding on leave.

It has been decided to accept the recommendation of the Pay Committee subject to the following conditions 1. No advance may be granted when the leave taken is for less than a month/30 days.

2. The amount of the advance should be restricted to the amount of leave salary for the last month of leave that is clearly admissible to the Govt. servant after deductions on account of Income Tax, Provident Fund, House-rent, repayment of advances, etc., so that there is no financial risk involved. The advance of leave salary will not include allowance.

3. The advance should be adjusted in full in the leave salary bill in respect of leave availed of. In case where the advance cannot be so adjusted in full, the balance will be recovered from the next payment of pay/or/and leave salary.

4. The advance may be sanctioned by the Head of Office or by any other subordinate officer to whom the power may be specially delegated both in case of Gazetted and non-Gazetted Officers.

5. Officers who are Heads of Offices may sanction the advance to themselves. (Finance Deptt. No. 20513/F., dated the 7th June, 1961)

39. Provisional payment of leave salary to Gazetted Government servants: A question has arisen whether the concession of provisional payment of leave salary for a period not exceeding one month admissible to Gazetted Government servants under this Department Office Memorandum No. 39301/F., dated the 16th November, 1961 as extended in Office Memorandum No. 2655/F., dated the 20th January, 1962, is permissible in the case of leave preparatory to retirement and refused leave. It is clarified that this concession is permissible in such cases. However, before a provisional leave salary certificate is issued in such case, an undertaking for recovery of the leave salary, if any, paid in excess, should be taken from the Government servant concerned.

(F.D. Deptt. No. 11353/F., dated the 31st March, 1977)

40. Periods spent by Government servants for attending Court duties: The undersigned is directed to say that the Government have had under consideration the question of the treatment of the periods spent by Government servants in attending Courts to give evidence or to serve as assessors or jurors. It has been decided as follows -

(a) Where a Government servant is summoned by Courts of Law, whether criminal or civil, or by a Court Martial or by a properly constituted authority holding a departmental enquiry in India or by a Court in foreign territory to give evidence regarding fact which came to his knowledge in the discharge of his public duties, the period of absence will be treated as duty.

(b) Where the Government servant is summoned as a witness by the Courts or authorities referred to in (a) above to depose about facts which came to his knowledge in his private capacity, the period of absence should be treated as casual or ordinary leave as may be due to him under the rules. No special leave will be granted for this purpose.

(c) The period spent by Government servants in attending Courts of Law as jurors or assessors with the permission of their respective Heads of Departments should be treated as special casual leave, which should not be debited to the casual leave account.

(2) The Government servants attending Courts of Law in circumstances referred to para. I above should produce certificate of attendance from the Court in support of the period of absence.

(3) The Govt. servants attending Courts in circumstances referred to para I above during the period of leave will not be given any extra leave for such attendance nor will their leave be considered to have been interrupted by such attendance.

(F.D. No. 24696/F., dated the 19th July 1961)

41. Disbursement of leave salary in advance to Government servants who avail of leave on reversion from foreign service:

The undersigned is directed to invite a reference to this Department Office Memorandum No. 20513/F., dated 7th June, 1961 regarding payment of leave salary in advance and to state that a question has been raised as to how and by whom the advnace of leave salary shall be paid in respect of a Government servant on foreign service.

(2) It has been decided that the advance of leave salary in respect of Govt. servants who avail of leave during or on reversion from foreign service shall be paid by the foreign employer without any specific authority/orders from the Accounts Officer/competent authority for the drawl of the advance.

3. The payment of advance to Government servants on foreign service in India will be subject to the observance of the following procedure -

(i) As soon as the foreign employer pays the advance, he should place demand on the Accountant General/Head of Office responsible for authorising/drawing leave salary duly supported by the cash receipt obtained from the officer.

(ii) The Accountant General/Head of Office should check the correctness of the amount paid as advance and refund the amount of the advance to the foreign employer by means of a bank draft. If it is found that the advance already paid by the foreign e.nployer is more than the correct amount admissible under rules, the Accountant-General/ Head of Office should reimburse only the correct amount and request the foreign employer to recover the balance from Govt. servant direct.

(iii) The amount of bank draft should be classified under the final head to which the leave salary is debitable.

(iv) Suitable entries should also be made by Accountant General in his objection book and the Audit Register for watching the adjustment of the advance in usual courses. Likewise, the Head of Office should keep appropriate note in his records to watch the adjustment of the advance from the final leave salary.

(v) The foreign employer should indicate in the Last Pay Certificate the outstanding advance so that the recovery of the same is not less sight of by Accountant General/Head of Office.
(F.D. No. 35922/F., dated the 17th September, 1962)

42. Refusal of leave preparatory to retirement: After very careful consideration, Government have been pleased to decide that leave preparatory to retirement applied for by a Government employee should not normally be refuses. Leave preparatory to retirement applied for by any Government employee should be granted as soon as the application is received and sanction order should not be cancelled subsequently resulting in refusal of leave.

(2) It has further been decided that where, in exigencies of public service, it is considered absolutely necessary to refuse leave prepatory to retirement to a gazetted officer, the Departmental concerned must obtain the orders of the Chief Minister through the Minister-in-charge. In the case of a non-gazetted officer, the Departmental concerned must obtain orders of the Chief Secretary or the Additional Chief Secretary before any leave preparatory to retirement is refused.
(F.D. No. 35262/F., Dt. 27.09.1966)

43. Refused leave after compulsory retirement: The undersigned is directed to invite a reference to Rule 162 of the Odisha Service Code, where under the amount of leave earned by a Government servant during the period of extension of service which is due to him and which he has in sufficient time during the period of extension formally applied for as preparatory to final cessation of duties and been refused, can be granted to him after duties finally cease.

A doubt has been raised whether where a spell of extension of service is allowed by a further period of extension, the leave which was refused in the interest of the public service before the expiry of the first period of extension of service, can be granted after the date of final cessation of duties, (i.e., after the second spell) even though the Government servant does not actually apply for the leave preparatory to final cessation of duties in sufficient time during the second period of extension and get the same refused.

In view of the fact that the entire period commencing from the date of compulsory retirement and ending on the date of final cessation of duties constitutes the period of extension for the purpose of the above rules and also that the amount of leave earned for service after the date of compulsory retirement should have been applied for in sufficient time and as preparatory to final cessation of duties, the position is that only the leave applied for during the last spell of extension as preparatory to final cessation of duties and formally refused in the interest of the public service should be treated as refused leave to be granted beyond the date of final cessation of duties. (F.D. No. 28652/F., dated the 15th September, 1960)

44. Grant of refused leave after compulsory retirement Clarifications regarding: In view of the considerable liberalisation in the matter of counting of service and reckoning of emoluments for pension in respect of officers retiring on or after the 1st March, 1961, Govt. have been pleased to decide that grant of refused leave to a Government servant under Rule 162 of Odisha Service Code or under Rule 5 of the Odisha Leave Rules immediately after the date of compulsory retirement on the expiry of the extension of service granted to him should not be treated as carrying with it automatic extension of service as provided in the Note below Rule 71 of the Code and he should not be allowed to retain a lien on his post during the period of such leave. Necessary amendments to the Code are being issued separately.

2. The following other decisions and clarifications are made in this connection:-

(a) A Government servant who avails himself of the refused leave in full or in part immediately after the date of his compulsory retirement or on the expiry of the extension of service, will be deemed, for the purpose other than thereof pensionary/Contributory Provident Fund benefits and lien, to be in service till the expiry of the leave so availed. He will retire and become eligible for all pensionary benefits as due to him on the date of superannuation or such other later date if any extension of service is granted, from the date of expiry of such leave only. Permanent arrangement may be made in the chain of vacancies caused by the grant of such leave and the leave reserve, if any, provided in the cadre need not be taken to cover the vacancies caused by the grant of this leave,

b) A Government servant who had not the opportunity to avail of the ( refused leave either in whole or in part immediately after retirement on account of his re-employment may avail of such leave either during the period of re-employment or after the termination of the period of re-employment.

(c) Where a Government servant is re-employed while on refused leave taken immediately after the date of compulsory retirement or on the expiry of the extension of service, as the case may be, the leave salary that will be payable during the period of refused leave so availed of, shall be the same as would have been admissible in the normal course but for re-employment reduced by the amount of pension and pension equivalent of gratuity and other retirement benefits. He will not refused leave so availed of. The grant of such leave during the period of re-employment is, however, conditional on the re-employing authority being able to grant any part of the refused leave the sanctioned period of re-employment.

(d) Where the refused leave is taken during the period of re-employment but not immediately after the date of compulsory retirement or the date of expiry of extension of service, as the case may be, the leave salary that will be payable during the period of refused leave so availed so, shall be the same as would have been admissible in the normal course but for re-employment reduced by the amount of pension and pension equivalent of gratuity and other retirement benefits. He will not be entitled to draw his re-employment salary during the period of the refused leave so availed of. The grant of such leave during the period of re-employment is, however, conditional on the re-employing authority being able to grant any part of the refused leave during the sanctioned period of re-employment.

Where the refused leave is taken the termination of a period of re-employment the leave salary shall be the same as admissible under sub-paragraph (d) above.

(e)

(f)

The leave salary for the refused leave which is permitted to be availed of either during or on termination of the period of re-employment should be borne by the Deptt. which could have borne it had the leave been availed of immediately after the retirement.

(F.D. No. 14669/F., dated the 8th April, 1963)

45. According to the instructions issued in the Finance Department O.M. No. 14669/F., dated the 8th April, 1963 when a Govt. servant avails himself of the refused leave immediately after the date of compulsory retirement or on the expiry of any extension of service he will be deemed to have retired and become eligible for all pensionary benefits as due to him on the date of superannuation or such other later date, if any extension of service is granted, from the date of expiry of such leave only.

The matter has now been reconsidered and it has been decided that when a Government servant is granted refused leave extending beyond the date of compulsory retirement or on the expiry of an extension of service, he shall be deemed for the purpose of pensionary benefits to have retired from service on the date of his compulsory retirement or on the expiry of the extension of service, as the case may be, and shall become eligible for all pensionary benefits from the date. The leave salary admissible in such cases during the period of refused leave will be the same as admissible in the normal course but reduced by the amount of pension and pension equivalent of other retirement benefits. The dearness allowance admissible, if any, on leave salary in such cases would, however, be reduced by ad hoc increase of pension.

In a case, when the amount of leave salary and dearness allowance admissible is less the pension equivalent of the retirement gratuity, it should be adjusted against pension (including pension equivalent of the retirement gratuity) and ad hoc încrease of pension respectively. It may be mentioned that dearness allowance during refused leave is admissible only during such part of leave on average pay as falls during the first four months of such leave. In other words, the officer would be entitled to the following payment by way of pension, leave salary and dearness allowance.

(i) Leave Salary: Nil

(ii) Normal pension and and hoc increase on such pension, if any; and

(iii) The difference between the dearness allowance on the leave salary which the officer would have been normally entitled to and the ad hoc increase on pension.

(F.D. No. 14868/F., dated the 20th April, 1966)

46. Delegation of powers to the appointing authority to sanction refused leave: The undersigned is directed to say that under the provisions of Rule 162 read with paragraph 229 of the Companion to the Odisha Service Code and Travelling Allowance Rules the grant of refused leave to a Government servant governed by the Leave Rules, in Chapter VI of the said Code required the sanction of the State Government with the concurrence of the Finance Department whereas under Rule 5 of the leave rules in Appendix-10 of the Code, the authority competent to sanction ordinary leave has powers to sanction refused leave to Government servants governed by those rules. Govt. feel that this differentiation in procedure is not necessary. It has, therefore, been decided that in the case of Government servants who are governed by the leave rules in Chapter VI of the Code, the appointing authority shall be competent to sanction the refused under Rule 162 of the Code.

(F.D. No. 2013/F., dated the 23rd January, 1964)

[Other orders of Government of Odisha on leave have been printed below Appendix 10 of this compilation.]

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA'S ORDER

47. Maternity leave for induced abortion: It has been decided that the abortion induced under the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971, should also be considered as a case of abortion for the purpose of granting maternity leave under the C.C.S. (Leave) Rules, 1972.

(GI, M.F. O.M. No. 14(6)-E.IV(A)/74, Dt. 21.04.1975)

48. No maternity leave for threatened abortion: It is clarified that "abortion" does not include "threatened abortion" and maternity leave cannot be granted in the case of "threatened abortion".

(GI, D.P. & A.R., O.M. No. 13018/11/84-Estt. (L), Dt. 16.03.1985)

49. Maternity leave in respect of female employee of the Central Government Rule 43 of the C.C.S. (Leave) Rules, 1972, stands amended as follows

"43. Maternity Leave.

(1) A Female Government servant (including an apprentice with less than two surviving children may be granted maternity leave by an authority competent to grant of leave for a period of 90 days (now 135 days) from the date of its commencement.

(2) During such period she shall be paid leave salary equal to the pay drawn immediately before proceeding on leave.

Note: In the case of a person to whom the Employee's State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1941) applies, the amount of leave salary payable under this rule shall be reduced by the amount of benefit payable under the said Act for the corresponding period.

(3) Maternity leave not exceeding 6 weeks (now 45 days in the entire service) may also be granted to a female Government servant (irrespective of number of surviving children) in case of miscarriage, including abortion on production of medical certificate as laid down in rule 19.

4. (a) Maternity leave may be combined with leave of any other kind.

(b) Notwithstanding the requirement of production of medical certificate contained in subrule (1) of rule 30, or sub-rule (1) of rule 31, leave of the kind due and admissible (including commuted leave for a period not exceeding 60 days and leave not due) upto a maximum of one year may, if applied for, be granted in continuation of maternity leave granted under sub-rule (1).

(5) Maternity leave shall not be debited against the leave account. (GI, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Deptt. of Per. & Trg.) No. 11012/1-85-Estt. (L), Dt. 6.6.1988)

50. Paternity Leave Eligibility: Male Government servant with less than two surviving children.

Duration: 15 days during the confinement of his wife. Leave salary: Equal to last pay drawn

Not to be debited in the leave Account, and not to be refused normally. (O.M., Dt. 07.10.1997)

51. Credit in the Leave Account of an officer serving in the Vacation Department: It has been brought to the notice of the Govt. that no uniformity is maintained in the matter of giving credit in the Leave Account of an officer serving in the Vacation Deptt. when he proceeds on leave before completing a full year of duty. To bring uniformity in this regard it has now been decided that the following procedure should be followed in respect of officers governed under Rule 163 of Odisha Service Code, and Rule 4 of the Liberalisation of Leave Rules.

(i) When no vacation falls within the incomplete year of service the Government servant is entitled to leave earned at the rate of 1/11 during that period of duty as reduced by 1/12 of that period. The credit so afforded will be corrected suitably if later on it transpires that officer has availed of either proportionately or has not availed of at all the vacations which fell during the full year.

(ii) When vacation falls within the incomplete year but is partially enjoyed, the proportion 15 days, or 30 days, as the case may be, which should be deducted from the leave account is the proportion which the vacation actually enjoyed plus the vacation that will fall within the remaining period of twelve months bears to the whole period of vacations which fall within the period of twelve months.

(iii) When the vacation; falls within the incomplete year but is fully enjoyed, the fraction of 15 days or 30 days, as the case may be, which should be deducted from the leave account is the fraction which the period of duty including vacation bears to the whole period of duty (including vacation).

The expression 'each year of duty' occurring in Rule 139 of Odisha Service Code, should be held as period of twelve months beginning on the date following the date on which he completed the previous year of duty and exclusive of leave. (F.D. No. 19102/F., Dt. 20.05.1961)

9652. Simplification in the rate of calculating entitlement to Earned Leave in case of the Government servants serving in a department under regular establishment other than a Vacation Department: The undersigned is directed to invite a reference to Rule 7 (1) of Odisha leave Rules, 1966 according to which the Earned leave admissible to a permanent Government servant is one-eleventh of the period spent on duty.

2. As a measure of simplification of procedure for calculating entitlement of E.L. the Governor has been pleased to decide that in modification of Rule 7 (1) of Odisha Leave Rules, 1966 the following procedure may be adopted in calculating the entitlement to Earned Leave of Government servants who are serving in a Deptt., other than a Vacation Department :-

(a) Each employee's account of leave should be credited with 30 days and 31 days Earned Leave in alternate calendar years. This should be done in two installments, 15 days on the first of January and July every year except that on the first of July of an even year (ending with 2,4,6,8 or 10) the credit shall be 16 days. Thus, the credit on the first of January 1976 will be 15 days on the first July 1976, 16 days while both on 1st January and 1st July, 1977 it will be 15 days and so on.

(b) The leave at the credit of the employee at the close of the previous half year shall be carried forward on the next half year, subject to the leave so carried forward plus the credit for that half-year not exceeding the maximum limit of 180 days.

3. When a Government servant is appointed on or after 1.1.76 Earned Leave should be credited to his leave account at the rate of 22. days of each completed month of service which he is likely to render in the calendar half-year in which he is appointed, e.g., if he is appointed on 13th March, the number of complete months of his service in that half-year will be 3 and the credit will be 3×5/2-7½ days rounded to 3 days. If he is appointed on 20th April the number of complete months will be only 2 and the credit will be 2x5/2= 5 days.

4. The credit for the half year in which a Govt. servant is due to retire or resigns from service shall be afforded only at the rate of 21½ days per completed month in that half year up to the date of retirement/ resignation. If in the case of a Government servant who resigns from the service, the leave already availed of is more than the credit so due to him, necessary adjustment should be made in respect of leave salary overdrawn if any.

5. If a Government servant has taken any leave other than eamed leave in a half year, the credit to be afforded to his leave account at the commencement of the half year shall be reduced by 1/11th of such leave, e.g., if a Government servant has taken 11 days half pay leave or 11 days Commuted Leave or 11 days Extraordinary Leave, the credit to his leave account will be reduced by 1 day, i.e., 1/11th of the 11 days Half-Pay Leave or Commuted Leave or Extraordinary Leave.

6. When affording credit under the above method, fractions of a day will be rounded off to the nearest day.

7. From 1.1.1976, the leave account shall be maintained in the enclosed form. While the Earned Leave shall be credited in advance in the manner stated above, there will be no change in respect of other kinds of leave. The entries in respect of such leave shall be made as and when occasion for doing so arises. In the case of existing Govt. servants, the old leave account has to be closed and the credit of leave as on 31.12.75 will have to be carried forward to the new leave account. While doing so, fractions of a day will be rounded off to the nearest day.

(F.D. No. 20180/F., Dt. 22.04.1976)

53. Government servant who had not completed one year

of service on 1.1.1976 Entitlement of Earned Leave: The undersigned is directed to invite a reference to Rule 11 of Odisha Leave Rules, 1966 according to which the Earned Leave admissible to Government servant not in permanent employ in respect of the first year of service is one-twenty second of the period spent on duty

2. Consequent upon the change in the rate of calculating entitlement to Earned Leave made vide F. D. No. 20180/F., dated the 22.4.76 the Governor has been pleased to decide that a temporary Govt. servant who has joined in Govt. service on or after 1.1.1976 shall be entitled to Eamed Leave at the rate of 1/11th of the period spent on duty. The Govt. servant entering into Govt. service on 1.1.76 will be entitled to Earned Leave was under consideration of Govt. for some time past. The Govt. has been pleased to decide that such a Govt. servant shall be entitled to Eamed Leave from 1.1.76 onwards at the same rate as admissible to Govt. servant in permanent employ as per Finance Deptt. Office Memorandum referred to above. (F.D. No. 58837/F., Dt. 18.11.1977)

54. Reduction of Earned Leave for the different kinds of leave availed of by a Government servant during a half-year- Clarifications: Para. (5) of the Finance Department O.M. No. 20180/ F., dated 22.4.1976 stipulates that if a Government servant has taken any leave other than Earned Leave (i.e., Half-Pay Leave, Commuted Leave, Extraordinary Leave) in a half year, the credit of E.L. to be afforded to his leave account at the commencement of the next-half year shall be reduced by 1/11th of such leave.

2. The above decision has been reviewed in the light of subsequent decision of the Govt. of India and after careful consideration, the Governor has been pleased to decide, in modification of the above para. that if a Government servant has taken Extraordinary Leave in a half year, the credit of Earned Leave to be afforded to his leave account at the commencement of the next half-year shall be reduced by 1/10th of the period of such Extraordinary Leave only, subject to a maximum of 15 days. There will be no reduction in Earned Leave on account of Half-Pay Leave or Commuted Leave.

3. Where a Govt. servant ceases to be in service in course of a particular half-year due to retirement, resignation, death or any other cause, the amount of earned leave which would be credited to his leave account in terms of para. (4) of the above O.M. dated 22.4.76 shall also stand reduced by 1/10th of the period of Extraordinary Leave if availed of during the half-year. In case, the amount of Earned Leave credited at the commencement of that half-year is found inadequate for the purpose of adjustment towards E.O.L., then necessary adjustment may be made from the existing leave account.

(F.D. No. 31633/F., Dt. 14.08.1989)

55. Admissibility of Earned Leave Ceiling of 180 days enhanced to 240 days when encashment of unutilised E.L. allowed: As per Rule 31 of Odisha Service Code, leave cannot be claimed as of right and when the exigencies of public service so required, discretion to refuse or revoke leave of any description is reserved to the authority empowered to grant it. Rule 7(1) of Odisha Leave Rules; 1966 provides that the Govt. servant will cease to earn leave when the Eamed Leave due amounts to 180 days.

2. The position has been reviewed by Government in the light of decision made recently by Government of India and the Governor has now been pleased to make following modifications to the above provisions.

3. Earned Leave should not ordinarily be denied to any Government servant, especially in the last ten years of his service career and the leave sanctioning authorities are, therefore, requested to ensure it.

4.(a) The existing maximum limit of 180 days of accumulation of Eamed Leave shall be enhanced to 240 days.

(b) The present ceiling of 180 days for availing the benefit of encashment of unutilised Earned Leave shall be increased to 240 days in respect of the following categories :-

(i) Retirement on attaining the age of superannuation.

(ii) Voluntary/premature retirement or retirement on invalidation.

(iii) Where the services of a Government servant are terminated by notice or by payment of pay and allowances in lieu of notice otherwise in accordance with the terms and conditions of his appointment.

(iv) In the case of termination of re-employment after retirement.

(v) Cases where the service of a Government servant has been extended, in the interest of public service beyond the date of retirement on superannuation.

(vi) In the case of death of a Government servant while in service, to the family of the deceased.

(vii) In the case of leave preparatory to retirement.

(viii) In the case of transfer of Government servant to an industrial establishment and

(ix) On absorption of a Govt. servant in the public sector undertakings.

(c) A Government servant who resigns or quits service shall be entitled to cash equivalent in respect of Earned Leave at credit on the date of cessation of service, to the extent of half of such leave at his credit, subject to a maximum of 120 days.

(F.D. No. 55423/F., Dt. 14.11.1986)

56. Admissibility of leave salary on unutilised Earned Leave on superannuation/or death while in service: According to instructions contained in Office Memo. No. 60319/F., dated the 28th November, 1977 and No. 34015/F., dated the 13th July, 1978 of Finance Department, a Government servant on his retirement on attaining the age of superannuation is entitled to cash equivalent of unutilised E.L. available at his credit subject to maximum of 180 days: Besides, Finance Deptt. Meno. No. 441/F., dated the 3rd January, 1978. and No. 12817/F., dated 31st March, 1983 also provide that in cases of death of Government servant while in service, the family members of the deceased are entitled to the benefit of encashment of unutilised E.L. available at the credit of the deceased Government servant subject to the maximum of 180 days.

2. It has come to the notice of Finance Department that in absence of specific instruction regarding calculation of leave salary in the above mentioned cases, different procedures are being followed in such matters. With a view to adopting a uniform procedure in this regard, it has been decided that calculation with regard to leave salary admissible in such cases may be made in the following manner:

Cash Payment - "Pay admissible on the date of retirement on attaining the age of superannuation/death while in service plus D.A. & A.D.A. admissible on that date. Number of unutilised E.L. available at the credit on the date of retirement/death subject to a maximum of 180 days". (F.D. No. 36339/F., Dt. 28.08.1984)

57. Admissibility of leave salary on unutilised earned leave- Clarification regarding: The manner of calculation of leave salary on unutilised earned leave has been communicated in Para.2 of the Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 201801 dated the 28th August 1984. Some doubts have been raised in certain quarters whether special pay will be included towards pay for the purpose. It should be bome in mind that the special pay is allowed to a Government servant in consideration of the special arduous nature of duties or a specific and significant addition to his work or responsibility under Rule 40 of Odisha Service Code. But the benefit of leave salary on unutilisd earned leave is given to a Govt. servant after retirement when he ceases to hold this post.

2. It is, therefore, clarified that the special pay will not be taken into account while calculating the leave salary on unutilised eamed leave and the pay for the purpose means :-

(i) The basic pay as defined in Rule 33 (a) (i) of the Odisha Service Code, which the Government servant was receiving immediately, before retirement/death etc.

(ii) Personal pay, granted under Rule 37(a) of OSC.

( iii) Any other recurring emoluments which may be specially classed as "Pay" by Government under Rule 33 (a) (iii) of Odisha Service Code.

(F.D. No. 46829/F., Dt. 04.12.1999)

58. Restoration of the benefit: The proposal for restoration of the scheme for surrender of earned leave in favour of State Government employees of regular establishments was under active consideration of Government for some time past. After careful consideration, the Governor has been pleased to decide that the State Government employees who have not less than 120 days earned leave at their credit will be allowed to surrender 30 days earned leave for encashment, once in a Block Period of 24 months with effect from 1.4.94. It has also been decided that the amount of leave salary drawn in each case shall be credited to the General Provident Fund Accounts of the concemed Government employees and shall be regulated under the General Provident Fund Rules. The guidelines for operation of the scheme of Surrendered Leave Salary are annexed. (F.D. No. 21666/F., Dt. 14.06.1994)

59. Procedure for earned leave in lieu of leave salary and allowances: Some doubts have been raised in some quarters on the manner of implementation of the instructions issued in Finance Department Resolution No. 34642/F., dated the 21st July, 1973, regulating encashment of earned leave. The are clarified below for the guidance of all concemed.

1. The question has been raised whether it is obligatory on the part of an employee to avail himself of earned leave for a period of not less than 30 days in order that he can be allowed to surrender up to a maximum of 30 days earned leave in lieu of leave salary and allowances. In all cases coming under para 2 (a) of the aforesaid resolution an employee has actually to avail himself of earned leave for a period not less than 30 days, so as to enable him to encash another portion of his earned leave. Where an employee after being sanctioned earned leave fo 30 days or more and allow to encash another portion of his earned leave, resumes duty without actually availing himself of leave for a period of not less than 30 days, has to refund the encashment value of the surrendered leave in one lump sum immediately on his resumption of duty. These conditions would not, however, apply to cases of refusal of earned leave which would not be governed by para 2 (c) of the said Resolution.

2. Another question which has been put forward is whether encashment of leave can be made for any period before earned leave is actually availed or before the period for which grant of earned leave is refused. The Scheme envisages in para 2 (a) of the Resolution that the period of leave availed of should in all cases precede the period of leave to be surrendered. For instance, an employee applies for earned leave for 30 days and for encashment of leave for another 30 days, with the period commencing from the 1st August, 1973. In such case, the availing of earned leave should cover the first period of 30 days from the 1st August, 1972 to the 20th August, 1973, and only the second period from the 31st August, 1973 to the 29th September, 1973 can. be surrendered. Similar procedure should be followed in case of refusal of leave also.

3. Instances have come to notice in which large number of employees in some offices have simultaneously applied for earned leave under the impression that the refusal of leave will automatically entitle the applicants concerned to encash the leave under para 2 (e) of the Resolution. To prevent such wrong impression and to implement resolution in accordance with the spirit of concession granted by Government for encashing leave under certain circumstances the following guidelines are laid down.

(a) As leave cannot be claimed as a matter of right, the Head of Office will be free to sanction leave in accordance with a predetermined programme for the year, such a programme should be drawn up immediately for the reminder of the current year.

(b) In preparing the leave programme, the Head of office will take into account the preferences of individuals as well as the period that has elapsed since each person has last taken leave. It is only fair that those who had taken leave in the more distant past should ordinarily be given priority over those who had taken leave in the recent past.

(c) The number of persons that can be on earned leave at one time will naturally be limited to the sanctioned strength of leave reserve in that particular category.

(d) Refusal of leave will be deemed to be in the public interest for the purpose of para 2 (e) of the resolution only when the period and the timing of the leave so refused had been programmed earlier in accordance with the guidelines at (a) (b) and (c) above. In all other cases, where leave is refused the facility for encashment will not be available.

(e) When the refusal of leave is deemed to be in public interest and encashment allowed; the leave account will be debited in the same manner as if the leave had been availed of. (F.D. No. 3756/F., Dt. 11.08.1973)

60. Procedure for calculating entitlement of Earned Leave: The undesigned is directed to invite a reference to Rule 7(1) of Odisha Leave Rules, 1966 according to which the Earned Leave admissible to a permanent Govt. servant is one-eleventh of the period spent on duty.

2. As measure of simplification of procedure for calculating entitlement of E.L. the Government has been pleased to decide that in modification of Rule 7 (1) of Odisha Leave Rules, 1966 the following procedure may be adopted in calculating the entitlement to Earned Leave of Government servants who are serving in a Deptt., other than a Vacation Department:

(a) Each employee's account of leave should be credited with 30 days and 31 days Earned Leave in alternate calendar years. This should be done in two installments, 15 days on the first of January and July every year except that on the first of July of an even year (ending with 2, 4, 6, 8, 10) the credit shall be 16 days. Thus, the credit on the first of January, 1976, 15 days, and on the 1st July 1976 16 days while both on 1st January and 1st July, 1977 it will be 15 days and so on.

(b) The leave at the credit of the employee at the close of the previous half year shall be carried forward to the next half year, subject to the leave so carried forward plus the credit for that half-year not exceeding the maximum limit of 180 days.

3. When a Government servant is appointed on or after 1.1.76 Eamed Leave should be credited to his leave account at the rate of 2012 days for each completed month of service which he is likely to render in the calendar half-year in which he is appointed, e.g., if he is appointed on 13th March, the number of complete months of his service in that half-year will be 3 and the credit will be 3 x5/2 = 71/2 days rounded to 3 days. If he is appointed on 20th April the number of complete months will be only 2 and the credit will 2 x 5/2 = 5 days.

4. The credit for the half year in which a Government servant is due to retire or resigns form service shall be afforded only at the rate of 21/2 days per completed month in that half year up to the date of retirement/ resignation. If in the case of Govt. servant who resigns from the service, the leave already availed of is more than the credit so due to him, necessary adjustment should be made in respect of leave salary overdrawn, if any.

5. If a Government servant has taken any leave other than earned leave in a half year, the credit to be afforded to his leave account at the commencement of the next half year shall be reduced by 1/11th of such leave, e.g., if a Government servant has taken 11 days half pay leave or 11 days Commuted Leave or 11 days Extraordinary Leave, the credit to his leave account will be reduced by 1 day, i.e., 1/11th of the 11th days Half-Pay or Commuted Leave Extraordinary Leave.

6. When affording credit under the above method, fractions of a day will be rounded off the nearest day.

7. From 1.1.1976, the leave account shall be maintained in the enclosed form. While the Earned Leave shall be credited in advance in the manner stated above, there will be no change in respect of other kinds of leave. The entries in respect of such leave shall be made as and when occasion for doing so arises. In case of existing Govt. servants, the old leave account has to be closed and the credit of leave as on 31.12.1975 will have to be carried forward to the new leave account. While doing so, fractions of a day will be rounded off to the nearest day.

(F.D. No. 20180/F., Dt. 22.04.1976 )

61. Ceiling of 180 days E.L. enhanced to 240 days: As per Rule 131 of Odisha Service Code, leave cannot be claimed as of right and when the exigencies of public service so requires discretion to refuse or revoke leave of any description is reserved to the authority empowered to grant it. Rule 7 (1) of Odisha Leave Rules, 1966 provides that the Govt. servant will cease to earn leave when the Earned Leave due amounts to 180 days.

2. The position has been reviewed by Government in the light of decision recently by Government of India and the Governor has now been pleased to make following modifications to the above provisions.

3. Earned Leave should not ordinarily be denied to any Government servant, especially in the last ten years of his service career and the leave sanctioning authorities are, therefore, requested to ensure it.

4. (a) The existing maximum limit of 180 days of accumulation of Eamed Leave shall be enhanced to 240 days.

(b) The present ceiling of 180 days for availing the benefit of encashment of unutilised Earned Leave shall be increased to 240 days in respect of the following categories:

(i) Retirement on attaining the age of superannuation.

(ii) Voluntary/premature retirement of retirement on invalidation.

(iii) Where the services of a Government servant are terminated by notice or by payment of pay allowances in lieu of notice or otherwise in accordance with the terms and conditions of his appointment.

(iv) In the case of termination of re-employment after retirement.

(v) Cases where the service of a Government servant has been extended, in the interest of public service beyond the date of retirement on superannuation.

(vi) In the case of death of a Government servant while in service, to the family of the deceased.

(vii) In the case of leave preparatory to retirement.

(viii) In the case of transfer of Government servant to an industrial establishment; and

(ix) On absorption of a Govt. servant in the public sector undertakings.

(c) A Government servant who resigns or quits service will be entitled to cash equivalent in respect of Earned Leave at credit on the date of cessation of service, to the extent of half of such leave at his credit, subject to a maximum of 120 days.

(F.D. No. 55423/F., Dt. 14.11.1986)

62. Entitlement of E.L. to Government servant who had not completed one year of service on 1.1.1976: The undersigned is directed to invite reference to Rule 11 of Odisha Leave Rules, 1966 according to which the earned Leave admissible to a Government servant not in permanent employ in respect of the first year of service is one twenty second of the period spent on duty.

2. Consequent upon the change in the rate of calculating entitlement of Earned Leave made vide F.D. Memo No. 20180/F., dated 22.4.1976 the Governor has been pleased to decide that a temporary Government servant who has joined in Government service on or after 1.1.1976 shall be entitled to Earned Leave at the rate of 1/11th of the period of spent on duty. The Govt. servant entering into Government service on 1.1.1976 is entitled to Earned leave at the same rate as admissible to Govt. servant who has not completed one year of service on 1.1.76 will be entitled to Earned Leave was under consideration of Government for some time past. The Governor has been pleased to decide that such a Govt. servant shall be entitled to Earned Leave from 1.1.76 onwards at the same rate as admissible to a Govt. servant is permanent employ as per Finance Department Office Memorandum referred to above. (

F.D. No. 58837/F., Dt. 18.11.1977)

63. Reduction of Earned Leave for different kinds of leave availed of by a Government servant during a half-year Clarification: Para (5) of the Finance Department O.M. No. 20180/F., dated 22.4.1976 stipulates that if a Government servant has taken any leave other than Earned Leave (i.e. Half-Pay leave, Commuted Leave, Extraordinary Leave) in a half year, the credit of E.L. to be afforded to his leave account at the commencement of the next half year shall be reduced by 1/11th of such leave.

2. The above decision has been reviewed in the light of subsequent decision of the Government of India and after careful consideration, the Governor has been pleased to decide, in modification of the above para, that if a Government servant has taken Extraordinary leave and/or some period of his absence has been regularised by grant of Extraordinary Leave in a half year, the credit of Earned Leave to be afforded to his account at the commencement of the next half year shall be reduced by 1/10th of the period of such Extraordinary Leave only subject to a maximum of 15 days. There will be no reduction in Earned Leave on account of Half-Pay Leave of Commuted Leave.

3. Where a Government servant cases to be in service in course of a particular half year due to retirement, death or any other course, the amount of earned leave which would be c credited to his leave account in terms of para (4) of the above O.M. dated 22.4.76. shall also stand reduced by 1/10th of the period of Extraordinary Leave if availed of during the half year. In case, the amount of E.L. credited at the commencement of that half-year is found inadequate for the purpose of adjustment towards E.O.L. than necessary adjustment may be made from the existing leave account. (F.D. No. 31633/F., Dt. 14.08.1989)

64. Un-availed joining time is to be credited to E.L. Account: A Govt. servant is entitled to an admissible period of joining time for preparation and to cover the time actually spent in the journey to join a new post at a new place of posting. There are instances (i) where a Govt. servant is ordered to join a new post at a new place of posting without availing of full joining time to which he is entitled, or (ii) a Govt. servant proceeds alone and joins the post without availing of full joining time and takes his family later within the permissible period of time for claiming travelling allowance for the family. The question of providing benefit to the Govt. servants who cannot avail of full joining time due to above reasons was under examination of Government.

2. After careful consideration, the Governor has been pleased to decide that in the above cases the number of days of joining time admissible under the rules subject to a maximum of 10 days reduced by the number of days actually availed of shall be credited as Earned Leave to the Leave Account of the concerned Government servant provided the E.L. already at his credit together with the credit given under these orders shall not exceed 240 days.

3. The very order sanctioning the joining time shall reflect the number of day (s) of joining time actually un availed of and the authority competent to sanction leave shall credit the same to the leave account of the concerned Government servant. (F.D. No. 42876/F., Dt. 07.10.1992)

65. Revised method of calculation of E.L.: The leave account of a Government servant serving in a department other than a vacation department is credited with 30 days and 31 days of earned leave in alternate calender years. This is being done in two installments, i.e. 15 days on the first days of January and July every year except that on first of July of an even year, the credit of earned leave is 16 days in accordance with Finance Deptt. Office Memorandum No. 20180/F., dated the 22nd April 1976.

2. The aforesaid procedure has been reviewed with a view to simplifying the mode of calculation of earned leave and the Governor has been pleased to decide as follows:

The leave account of a Government servant serving in a department other than a vacation department shall be credited with earned leave in advance in two installments of 15 days each on first day of January and July of every calender year. The leave at the credit of a Government servant at the close of the previous half-year shall be carried forward to the next half year subject to the condition that the leave so carried forward plus the credit for the half year does not exceed the maximum limit of 240 days.

3. As a measure of further simplification of the procedure for calculating the entitlement to earned leave, it has been decided that in cases where the eamed leave at credit on 31st December/the 30th June is 240 days or less but more than 225 days, the advance credit of 15 days on the 1st January/1st July will be made in column 4 of the Form of leave account appended herewith. The resultant total will be shown in column 7 as 240 + the number of days exceeding the ceiling of 240 days. The number of earned leave exceeding ceiling be shown within brackets. Leave taken during the current half year will first be adjusted against the figures shown in the bracket in column 7. Column 11 will also show the balance as 240 days + number of days exceeding the ceiling if any, after a adjusting the leave taken. While arriving at the total earned leave at credit in column 7 at the time of allowing credit for next-half year, the credit in column 4 will be added to only that figure in column 11 which is outside the bracket. In the Annexure, the position has been illustrated in a sample form of the leave account also to column 11 for understanding and guidance.

4. The above decision shall take effect from the 1st January, 1995. (F.D. No. 20584/F., Dt. 17.05.1995)

66. Benefit of encashment of unutilsed EL/HPL to Government servant on voluntary retirement: In Finance Department Memorandum No. 2281/F., dated 12.1.1981, it was provided that a Government servant who is allowed to retire voluntarily or is made to retire from Government service in public interest under Rule 71 (b) of the Odisha Service Code or is retired on the ground of invalidation on the advice of Medical Authority under Rule 18 of Appendix 13 of Odisha Service Code would be entitled to cash equivalent of leave salary in respect of leave including half-pay leave at his credit on the date of such retirement subject to the condition that cash equivalent of leave salary payable in respect of Earned Leave shall be limited to 180 days. Subsequently, in Finance Department Memorandum No. 31940/F., dated 26.4.1984, it was also provided that encashment of E.L due and admissible in the above mentioned cases shall be subject to maximum of 180 days, even if this exceeds the date of normal retirement of superannuation.

2. The question of extending the benefit of encashment of unutilised leave to the Government servants who retire after rendering not less than 20 years of qualifying service under the Voluntary retirement Scheme as envisaged in Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 10516/F., dated 28.2.1978 was under consideration of Govt. for some time past.

3. After careful consideration, the Governor has been pleased to decide that the benefit of encashment of unutilised EL/HPL as has been allowed to Government servant who retires voluntarily under Rule 71 (a) of O.S.C. shall also be allowed to those Government servants who have retired voluntarily under the Voluntary Retirement Scheme as per Finance Department Memorandum No. 10516/F., dated 28.2.1978 on or after 31.12.1980 and that the conditions and restrictions as laid down in the Office Memorandum dated 12.7.1981 and 26.7.1984 referred to above shall apply to them.

(F.D. No. 26943/F., Dt. 12.07.1985)

67. Suspension of encashment of surrender leave benefit and Leave Travel concessions and encashment of unutilised Earned Leave at the time of retirement: With a view to arrear the worsening financial condition the State Government had implemented a number of austerity measures in Finance Deptt.'s Office Memorandum No. B.T.1.9/ 2001-10954/F., dated 14.3.2001. The facility of surrender leave encashment was temporarily deferred under the said Office Memorandum. Subsequently, the State Government relived a large number of representation from individual employees as well as various Service Organisations wherein it was pointed out that suspension of the facility in the middle of a Block period would be discriminatory since some employees had already availed of the facility while the remaining would be denied such facility. In view of such representations, the State Government continued with the facility of surrender Leave upto the period ending 31.03.2002.

2. The financial condition of the State Government continues to be grim on account of serious mis-match between receipts and expenditure. The State Government are taking all possible steps to ensure that funds continue to be allocated in respect of anti-poverty programmes directed towards the betterment of the under privileged sections of the society. In order to ensure continued support for such programmes as well as to meet challenges arising out of the on-going drought, the State Govt. have decided to suspend the benefit of Surrender Leave as well as Leave Travel Concession (LTC) with effect from 1.4.2002 till such time as the financial condition of the State Govt. improves.

3. The suspension of the benefit of encashment of surrender Leave and Leave Travel Concession with effect from 1.4.2002 is applicable to all categories of State Govt. employees. All India Service Officers serving under the State Govt. employees of all State Public Sector Enterprises, Corporation, Co-operatives, all types of Autonomous bodies, all Aided Institutions including universities receiving grant-in-aid from State Govt. Urban Local Bodies etc.

4. The State Government have also decided to enhance the existing upper limit of 240 days to 300 days for encashment of unutilised Earned Leave at the credit of an employee at the time of retirement. This additional limit would apply to all employees who retire on or after the 30th September, 2002. The enhance ceiling will not be applicable in respect of employees who have retired earlier.

(F.D. No. CS-II-84/100-45439/F., Dt. 27.09.2002)

68. Surrender of Earned Leave Payment in cash from 1.4.96: The proposal for cash payment of leave salary in respect of surrender of Earned Leave was under active consideration of Govt. for some time past. After careful consideration, Govt. have been pleased to decide, in modification of para. 6 (a) of F.D., O.M. No. 21666/F., dated the 14th June, 1994, that the cash payment of leave salary in respect of surrender of Earned Leave will be available to the eligible Govt. servant with effect from the commencement of the next Block Period, i.e., the 31st April, 1996 and the Govt. servants who are willing may credit the amount of leave salary into their G.P.F. account with the same terms and conditions as envisaged in par (b) and (c) thereunder.

The condition as contained in para (3) of F.D.O.M. No. 42631/F., dated the 17.12.1994 and para. 2(c) of F.D.O.M. No. 34074/F., dated the 04.09.1995, will stand modified accordingly.

(F.D. No. 8103/F., Dt. 28.02.1996)

69. Surrender of Earned Leave after the expiry of the Block-period-Clarification regarding: In terms of Para 3(a) (vi) of F.D.O.M. No. 21666/F., dated the 14th June, 1994, an applicant, in absence of his service Book/Roll with the sanctioning authority, is required to prove and convince the sanctioning authority that he is having required extent of Earned Leave at his credit on the day of sanction. Despite the above provision, it has come to the notice of Government that the benefit of the Block Period (1.4.94 to 31.3.1996) could not be sanctioned/ drawn during the Block Period where the sanction order of the higher authority had reached the subordinate office after expiry of the Block Period/where the Government servant either on leave or tour had failed to convince his authority about his leave account/where the Service Book/ Roll was held up with the higher authority.

2. In consideration of the above facts, Government in modification of Para. 3 (a) (vi) of Finance Department O.M. No. 21666/F., dated the 14th June, 1994, have been pleased to decide that the relaxation contained in F.D. Resolution No. 48196/F., dated the 7th December, 1984 (Para 2) and O.M. No. 44161/F., dated the 30th November, 1988 (Para. 2) shall be applicable in the cases where the benefit of surrender leave could not be granted within the Block Period due to grounds mentioned above.

3. This offer shall take effect from the Block Period, i.e., 1.4.1994- 31.3.1996. (F.D. No. 35242/F., Dt. 08.08.1996)

70. Surrender of Earned Leave sanctioned within the grace period - Clarification: The undersigned is directed to say that in terms of para (2) of F.D. O.M. No. 35252/F., dated the 8.8.1996, the benefit of surrender of Earned Leave which could not be sanctioned during the block-period due to administrative grounds can be sanctioned within the grace period of six months after expiry of the block period, i.e., within 30th September, 1996/1998 and so on. In the above context, clarification has been sought for from different quarters as to whether both sanction and drawn should be made on or before the last date of grace period.

2. In order to avoid the above doubt, it is clarified that the intention behind allowing the grace period is to clear up the liability of a particular block-period at best by the last date of grace period and therefore both the sanction and drawl should be completed by the date.

3. The claims of the previous block-period (1.4.1994-31.3.1996) already sanctioned by 30.9.1996 but not drawn due to objection of Treasuries are allowed to be drawn in relaxation of above stipulation.

(F.D. No. 9325/F., Dt. 05.03.1997)

71. Procedure for surrender of earned leave: Government have had under consideration for sometime past the question of allowing the Government servants to surrender a portion of earned leave and, in lieu thereof, get leave salary and allowance, and it has been decided that an employee may be allowed to encash earned leave to the extent and subject to the conditions specified below -

2. (a) An employee who takes earned leave for a period of not less than thirty days will be allowed to surrender upto a maximum of thirty days earned leave in lieu of leave salary and allowance for the leave so surrendered.

(b) An employee who takes earned leave for a period of not less than thirty days will be allowed to surrender up to a maximum of thirty days eamed leave in lieu of leave salary and allowances for the leave so surrendered.

(c) The concession of encashment of earned leave shall be allowed once in a block period 24 months commencing from 1st July, 1973.

(d) The leave salary and allowance admissible for the leave surrender shall be equivalent to that which the employee would have received had he actually availed himself of the leave so surrendered.

(e) If earned leave applied for by an employee is refused in public interest by a competent authority, then option to encash earned leave up to maximum thirty days may be available to such an employee without his actually proceeding on leave.

(f) Leave salary for the period of surrendered leave shall be paid in full as soon as possible after the date of commencement of leave or the date on which the leave would have commenced but for refusal of leave.

(g) The benefit of surrender of leave shall be admissible to Government employees who either holds a post under the Government or is in foreign service or on deputation to the Govt. of India or to any other State Government.

(h) In the case of a Government employee who is on the verge of retirement the period of leave surrendered shall not exceed the period of duty between the date of expiry of earned leave actually availed of and the date of compulsory retirement.

(i) The leave salary and allowances admissible for the leave surrendered shall not be liable to any deduction on account of Provident Fund Subscription, insurance permit, house rent, repayment of advances, etc., due to Govt.or "repayment of dues to Co-operative Societies" etc., but shall be liable to deduction of income tax, if the income is assessable to such taxed in the hands of the employee.

(j) The authorities who are empowered to sanction earned leave will be competent to accept the surrender of leave.

(k) Application for surrender of earned leave shall be made along with application for grant of leave.

(1) Any Govt. employee who is on earried leave [other that leave preparatory to retirement of refused leave referred to in Sub-para (e) above on the 1st July, 1973] the date of commencement of these orders shall be entitled to apply for surrender of eamed leave provided he continues to avail himself of a minimum of one month's earned leave from the said day.

(m) In order to guard any omission in posting a debit of the leave surrendered in the leave account of non-Gazetted Government employee, details of the surrendered leave shall be noted in his service book and in the leave account at the time the leave salary is drawn. A certificate to the effect that necessary entries have been made in the service book and the leave account shall be recorded by the drawing officer on the bill in rules which the leave salary for the surrendered leave is drawn.

3. Notification effecting necessary amendments to Odisha Leave Rules will be issued separately. (F.D. No. 34642/F., Dt. 21.07.1973)

72. Surrender of Earned Leave-Payment of leave salary in cash from 1.4.1996: The proposal for cash payment of leave salary in respect of surrender of Earned Leave was under active consideration of Government for sometime past. After careful consideration, Government have been pleased to decide, in modification of para, 6 (a) of Finance Deptt. Office Memorandum No. 21666/F., dated the 14th June, 1994, that the cash payment of leave salary in respect of surrender of Earned Leave will be available to the eligible Govt. servants with effect from the commencement of the next Book Period, i.e., the 1st April, 1996 and the Govt. servants who are willing may credit the amount of leave salary in their G.P. Fund accounts with the same terms and conditions as envisaged in para (b) and (c) thereunder.

The condition as contained in para (3) of Finance Department, O.M. No. 42631/F., dated the 17th December 1994 and para 2(c) of Finance Department No. 34074/F., dated 4th September 1995 will standard

(F.D. No. 8103/F., Dt. 28.02.1996)

modified accordingly. 73. Admissibility of surrender of Earned Leave after the expiry of the Block Period: In terms of para 3 (a) (vi) of F.D.O.M. No.

21666/F., dated 14.6.1994, an applicant, in absence of his Service Book/Roll with the sanctioning authority, is required to prove and convince the sanctioning authority that he is having required extent of Earned Leave at his credit of the day of sanction. Despite the above provision, it has come to the notice of Govt. that the benefit of II Block-Period (1.4.1994-31.3.1996) could not be sanctioned/drawn during the Block-Period where the Govt. servant had applied at the fag end of the Block-Period/where the sanction order of the higher authority had reached the sub-ordinate office after expirty of the block period where the Government servant either on leave or tour failed to convince his authority about his leave account/where the Service Book/Roll was held up with the higher authority.

2. In consideration of the above facts, Government in modification of para 3(a) (iv) of F.D.O.M. No. 21666/F., dated 14.6.1994, have been pleased to decide that the relaxation contained in Finance Deptt. Resolution No. 48196/F., dated 7.12.1984 (para 2) and in O.M. No. 44161/F., dated 30.11.1988 (para 2) shall be applicable in the cases where the benefit of Surrender Leave could not be granted within the Block Period due to grounds mentioned above.

3. This order shall take effect from the Block Period, i.e., 1.4.1994-31.3.1996. (F.D. No. 35242/F., Dt. 08.08.1996)

74. Clarification in respect of sanction of Surrender of Earned Leave within the grace period: The undersigned is directed to say that in terms of para (2) of FDOM No. 35252/F., dated 8.8.1996, the benefit of surrender of Earned Leave which could not be sanctioned during the Block-Period due to administrative grounds can be sanctioned within the grace period of six months after expiry of the Block Period, i.e., within 30 September, 1996/1998 and so on. In the above context clarification has been sought for from different quarters as to whether both sanction and drawl should be made on or before the last date of the grace period.

2. In order to avoid the above doubt, it is clarified that the intention behind allowing the grace period is to clear up the liability of a particular Block-Period at. best by the last date of grace period of therefore both the sanction and drawl should be completed by that date.

3. The claims of the previous Block-Period (1.4.1994-31.31996) already sanctioned by 30.9.1996 but not drawn due to objection of

Treasuries are allowed to be drawn in relaxation of above stipulation.

(F.D. No. 9325/F., Dt. 05.03.1997)

75. Admissibility of the benefit of "Surrender of Earned Leave" to the I.A.S., I.P.S. and I.F.S. Officers also: It has been decided by the State Government that this benefit will also be extended to the members of All India Services working in connection with the affairs of the State Govt. with effect from 1.4.1994 with the same terms and conditions as applicable to the State Government employees.

The benefit of surrendered Leave for the I.A.S., I.P.S. and I.F.S. officers working in connection with the affairs of the State shall be sanctioned by the G.A. Department, Home Department and Forest and Environment Department respectively. In case of other Central Govt. Services, respective Administrative Department of Government will sanction the same.

(F.D. No. 14869-AIS, Dt. 12.07.1994)

76. Consideration for suitably compensating the non-Gazetted policemen etc. working throughout the year on Sundays and public holidays: The question of suitably compensating the non-Gazetted Policemen including non-Gazetted Fire Service Personnel for working throughout the year on Sundays and Public holidays as well as for putting extra hours of duty during working days has been engaging the attention of Government for sometime past. After careful consideration, the Governor has been pleased to decide that as a compensation for work on Sundays and public holidays and for extra hours of duty on working days, the non-Gazetted Policemen including non-Gazetted Fire Service Personal shall be allowed the following leave benefits -

(1) Earned Leave for fifteen days for each completed year of duty commencing from 1.7.79, in addition of the earned leave normally admissible under the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966. The Additional earned leave will be credited to the Leave Account of the said personnel and for that purpose, the same procedure as laid down in Finance Deptt. O.M. No. 20180/F., Dt. 22.4.1976 will mutatis mutandis, be followed.

(2) To surrender leave up to a maximum of 30 days each year commencing from 1.7.79 in lieu of leave salary and allowances for the period of leave surrendered subject to the following conditions -

(a) The leave salary and allowances admissible for the leave surrendered shall be equivalent to the pay and allowances the employees is entitled to for the month preceding the date of sanction of surrendered leave.

(b) Leave salary for the period of surrendered leave shall be paid in full as soon as possible after the leave is allowed to be surrendered.

(c) The benefits shall be admissible during the period of deputation or foreign service.

(d) In the case of Govt. employee who is on the verge of retirement the period of leave surrendered shall not exceed the period of duty between the date of expiry of the period of leave surrendered and the date of superannuation. The benefit of leave shall not, however, be allowed in respect of leave sanctioned as leave preparatory to retirement.

(e) The leave salary and allowances admissible for the leave surrendered shall not be liable to any deduction on account of Provident Fund subscription, insurance premia, house rent, repayment of advances, etc., but shall be liable to deduction of income tax, if the income in the hands of the employee is assessable to such tax.

(f) The authorities empowered to sanction earned leave will be competent to allow the surrendered leave.

(g) The amount of leave allowed to be surrendered shall be debited to the leave account by the competent authority without mentioning particular dates of commencement and expiry of the period of leave so debited.

(h) To guard against omission in the posting of debit of the leave surrendered, in the Leave Account of non-Gazetted employees, details of the surrendered leave shall be noted in the Service Book and in the Leave Account at the time the leave salary is drawn. A certificate to the effect that necessary entries have been made in the Service Book and the Leave Account shall be recorded by the Drawing Officer on the bill in which the leave salary for the surrendered leave is drawn.

(3) Such of the personnel as have already availed the benefit of encashment of leave for the block period commencing from 1.7.1979, shall not be entitled to again surrender leave in lieu of leave salary and allowances during the year 1.7.1979 to 30.6.1980 under this resolution.

(4) The non-Gazetted Police Personnel including the Fire Service Personnel will not be entitled to the surrender leave benefit as is admissible under the Finance Department Resolution No. 25892/F., dated 24.5.1978. (F.D. No. 6547/F., Dt. 11.02.1980)

77. Additional Earned Leave benefit for the non-Gazetted Police and Fire Service personnel: The question of suitably compensating the non-Gazetted policemen including non-Gazetted fire- service personnel for working throughout the year on Sundays and Public Holidays as well as for putting extra hours of duty during working days has been engaging the attention of Government for sometime past. After careful consideration, the Governor has been pleased to decide that as a compensation for work on Sundays and Public Holidays and for extra hours of duty on working days, the non-Gazetted policemen including non-Gazetted fire-service personnel shall be allowed the following leave benefits

1. Earned Leave for fifteen days for each completed years of duty commencing from 1.7.1979, in addition to the earned leave normally admissible under the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966. This Additional Eamed Leave will be credited to the Leave Account of the said personnel and for that purpose, the same procédure as is laid down in Finance Deptt. O.M. No. 20180/F., dated 22.4.1976 will, mutatis mutandis, to be followed:

2. To surrender leave up to a maximum of 30 days each year : Commencing from 1.7. 1979 in lieu of leave salary and allowances for the period of leave surrendered subject to the following conditions-

(a) The leave salary and allowances admissible for the leave surrendered shall be equivalent to the pay and allowances the employee is entitled to for the month preceding the date of sanction of surrendered leave.

(b) Leave salary for the period of surrendered leave shall be paid in full as soon as possible after the leave is allowed to be surrendered.

(c) The benefit shall be admissible during the period of deputation on foreign service.

(d) In the case of a Government employee who is on the verge of retirement the period of leave surrendered shall not exceed the period of duty between the date of expiry of the period of leave surrendered and the date of superannuation. The benefit of surrender of leave shall not, however, be allowed in respect of leave sanctioned as leave preparatory to retirement.

(e) The leave salary and allowances admissible for the leave surrendered shall not be liable to any deduction on account of Provident Fund subscription, insurance premia, house rent, repayment of advance, etc., but shall be liable to deduction of income tax, if the income in the hands of the, employee in assessable to such tax.

(f) The authorities empowered to sanction earned leave will be competent to allow the surrender of leave.

(g) The amount of leave allowed to be surrendered shall be debited to the leave account by the competent authority without mentioning particular dates of commencement and expiry of the period of leave so debited.

(h) To guard against omission in the posting of debit of the leave surrendered, in the leave account of non-Gazetted employees, detains of the surrendered leave shall be noted in the Service Book and in the leave account at the time the leave salary is drawn. A certificate to the effect that necessary entries have been made in the Service Book and the leave account shall be recorded by the Drawing Officer on the bill in which the leave salary for the surrendered leave is drawn.

3. Such of the personnel as have already the benefit of encashment of leave for the Block Period commencing from 1.7,.1979, shall not be entitled to again surrender leave in lieu of leave salary and allowances during the year 1.7.1979 to 30.6.1,980 under this Resolution.

4. The non-Gazetted police personnel including the fire-service personnel will not be entitled to the surrender leave benefit as is admissible under the Finance Deptt. No. 25892/F., dt. 24.5.1978.

(F.D. No. 6541/F., Dt. 11.02.1980)

78. Extension of Additional Earned Leave benefit to the Inspectors of Police: The question of extending the leave benefits as allowed to the non-Gazetted policemen in this Deptt. No. 6541/F., dated the 11.2.1980 for working throughout the years on Sundays and Public Holidays and for putting extra hours of duty during working days to the Inspectors of Police consequent upon conferment of Gazetted status on them has been under consideration of Government.

2. As the nature of duties performed by the Inspector of Police remains unaltered after conferment of Gazetted status, the Governor has been pleased to decide that the leave benefits as are admissible to the non- Gazetted police personnel as per resolution referred to above, will also be admissible to the Inspectors of Police to the extent these were available to them prior to conferment of Gazetted status.

(F.D. No. 15429/F., Dt. 29.07.1982)

79. Additional Earned Leave benefit extended to the Staff of the State Guest House: In Finance Deptt No. 6448/F., dated the 8th February, 1980 eleven categories of the staff of the State Guest House, Bhubaneswar have been allowed the benefit of Additional Earned Leave of fifteen days each year as a compensation for work on Sundays and Public Holidays.

2. As the Sweepers and Pantry Helpers of State Guest House, Bhubaneswar are also working on Sundays and Public Holidays throughout the year, the Governor has now been pleased to decide that this Additional Earned Leave benefits as are admissible to the staff of the State Guest House as per the Resolution referred to above will also be admissible to the Sweepers and Pantry Helpers of State Guest House.

(F.D. No. 27159/F., Dt. 02.07.1984)

80. Additional Earned Leave benefit extended to the staff of the State Guest House In Finance Deptt. No. 6448/F., dated 8.2.1980 and No. 27159/F., dated 2.7.1984, thirteen categories of the Staff of the State Guest House Bhubaneswar have been allowed the benefit of Additional Earned Leave of fifteen days each year as a compensation for work on Sundays and Public Holidays.

2. As the following categories of the staff of the State Guest House are working on Sundays and Public Holidays throughout the year, the Governor has now been pleased to decide that the Additional Earned Leave admissible to the staff of the State Guest House as per the Resolution referred to above, will also be admissible to them.
1. Mechanical Helper
2. Cleaner
3. Laundry Helper
4. Laundry Operator
5. Senior Assistant-cum-Receptionist
6. Reception Assistant
7. Senior Assistant (Store)
8. Bill Assistant (Store)
9. Mali
10. Choukidar
11. Watchman-cum-Sweeper.
 (F.D. No. 46104/F., Dt. 16.12.1988)

81. Additional Earned Leave benefit available to the Follower Orderlies attached to Police Officers: With a view to suitably compensating the Follower orderlies attached to Police Officers for their work on Sundays and Public Holidays as well as for putting them into extra hours of duty on working days, the Governor has been pleased to allow them the following leave benefits.

2. Earned Leave for fifteen days for each completed year for duty commencing from 1.1.1991 in addition to the earned leave normally admissible under the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966. This Additional Earned Leave will be credited in advance to the Leave Account of the concerned employees and the same procedure as laid down in Finance Deptt. No. 20180/F., dt 22.4.1976, will mutatis mutandis be followed for the purpose.

3. To surrender earned leave up to a maximum of 30 days each year commencing from 1.4.1991 in lieu of leave salary and allowance for the period of leave surrendered subject to following conditions -

(a) The leave salary and allowance admissible for the leave so surrendered shall be equivalent to the pay and allowances the employee is entitled to for the month preceding the date of sanction of surrender leave.

(b) The leave salary for the period of surrender leave shall be paid in full as soon as possible after the leave is allowed to be surrendered.

(c) The leave salary and allowance admissible for the leave surrendered shall not be liable to any deduction on account of Provident Fund subscriptions, insurance premia, house rent, repayment of advances, etc. But house rent allowance and such other allowances of compensatory nature as are allowed for specific purposes and paid during the period of duty or leave actually availed, shall not be admissible in respect of leave surrendered for encashment.

(d) The authority empowered to sanction earned leave will be competent to allow the surrender of earned leave. A monthly programme for the first 10 months of the year should be drawn up for all eligible employees to be allowed this benefit. Others who become eligible later, will be allowed this benefit during last two months of the year.

(e) The amount of leave allowed to be surrendered shall be debited to the leave account by competent authority without mentioning particular dates of commencement and expiry of the period of leave so debited.

(f) To guard against omission in the posting of debit of the leave surrendered in the leave account of such employees, details of the leave surrendered shall, be noted in the Service Roll and in the leave account at the time the leave salary is drawn. A certificate to the effect that necessary entries have been made in the Service Roll and the leave account shall be recorded by the drawing officer on the bill in which the leave salary for the leave surrendered is to be drawn.

4. The Follower Orderlies attached to Police Officers shall not be entitled to the surrender leave benefit as is admissible under the Finance Department No. 25892/F., dated 24.5.1978. (F.D. No. 2000/F, Dt. 18.01.1991)

82. The Additional Earned Leave benefit is not admissible during the period on which employee remains absent from duty The benefit of Additional Earned Leave of fifteen days each year has been allowed to some of the employees of the State Govt. in F.D. No. 6547/F., dated 11.2.1980, No. 44475/F., dated 13.11.1984, No. 6448/F., dated 8.2.1980, No. 27159/F., dated 2.7.1984, 0. M. No. 56239/F., dated 25.11.1987, No. 46101/dated 16.12., 1988, No. 2000/F., dated 18.1.1991, to compensate them for their work on Sundays and Public Holidays as well as for putting them into extra hours of duty on working days. This Additional Earned Leave, i.e., credited in advance to the Leave Account of such employees in two installments at the commencement of each half-year.

2. A question has been raised whether the above benefit to be allowed in favour of such employees even during the period, they remain absent from duty. The very purpose of the benefit is not fulfilled when such a Government servant remains absent from duty by taking leave or otherwise.

3. The Government have therefore, been pleased to decide that the above benefit of Additional Earned Leave of fifteen days wherever admissible shall henceforth be allowed proportionately to the number of days of actual duty performed in a year including Sundays and Public Holidays. In other words, if such a Government servant remains absent from duty by taking leave or otherwise (excepting casual leave) in a half-year, the advance credit of Additional Earned Leave to be afforded to his Leave Account at the commencement of next half-year shall be reduced proportionately. However, a Government I servant under the above scheme shall not be entitled to Additional Earned Leave benefit of a particular half year during which he remains absent from duty for a continuous period of four months by taking leave otherwise.

4. Government have further been pleased to decide that the Government servants under the above scheme shall not be entitled to the above benefit in case they enjoy other concessions like Special Pay, Overtime Allowance, Work on shift basis, Weekly off, etc. for their work on Sundays and Public Holidays as well as for putting them into extra hours of duty on working days.

(F.D.No. 10925/F., Dt. 25.03.1991)

83. The Addl. Earned Leave benefit is not admissible during the period on which employee remains absent from duty: The benefit of Additional Earned Leave of fifteen days each year has been allowed to some of the employees of the State Govt. in Finance Deptt. No. 6547/F., dated 11.2.1980, No. 44457/F., dated 13.11.1984, No. 6448/F., dated 8.2.1980, No. 27159/F., dated 2.7.1984, O.M. No. 56239/F., dated 25.11.1987, No. 46101F., dated 16.12.1988, No. 2000/F., dated 18.1.1991, to compensate them for their work on Sundays and Public Holidays as well as for putting them into extra hours of duty on working days. This Additional Earned Leave is credited in advance to the Leave Account of such employee in two instillments at the commencement of each half-year.

2. A question has been raised whether the above benefit is to be allowed in favour of such employees even during the period they remain absent from duty. The very purpose of the benefit is not fulfilled when such a Govt. servant remains absent from duty by taking leave or otherwise.

3. The Govt. have therefore, been pleased to decide that the above benefit of Additional Earned Leave of fifteen days wherever admissible shall henceforth be allowed proportionately to the number of days of actual duty performed in your including Sundays and Public Holidays. In other words, if such a Govt. servant remains absent from duty by taking leave or otherwise (excepting casual leave) in a half-year, the advance credit of Additional Earned Leave to be afforded to his Leave Account at the commencement of next half-year shall be reduced proportionately. However, a Govt. servant under the above scheme shall bot be entitled to Additional Earned Leave benefit of a particular half-year during which he remains absent from duty for a continuous period of four months by taking leave otherwise.

4. Government have further been pleased to decide that the Government servants under the above scheme shall not be entitled to the above benefit in case they enjoy other concessions like Special Pay, Overtime allowance, Work on shift basis, Weekly off, etc. for their with on Sundays and Public Holidays as well as for putting them into extra hours of duty on working days.

(F.D. No. 10925/F., Dt. 25.03.1991)

84. Benefit of Additional Earned Leave of 15 days and surrender of 30 days E.L. each year to Jail employees: With a view to suitably compensating the Jailer, Asst. Jailer including Matron and Asst. Matron, Sub-Asst. Jailer, Chief Head Warder, Head of Warder including Sr. Attainder and Warder including Attendant for this work on Sundays and Public Holidays as well as for putting them into extra hours of duty on working days, the Governor has been pleased to allow them the following leave benefits.

2. Earned Leave for fifteen days for each completed year for duty commencing from 1.1.99 in addition to the Earned Leave normally admissible under the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966. This additional earned leave will be credited in advance to the leave account of the concerned employee and for that purpose, the same procedure as laid down in Finance Deptt. Office Memo. No. 20180/F., Dt. 22.4.1976 and F.D.O.M. No. 20584, Dt. 17.5.95 will mutatis mutandis be followed.

3. To surrender leave up to a maximum of 30 days each year commencing from 1.4.99 in lieu salary and allowances for the period of leave surrendered and the conditions as laid down in F.D. Resolution No. 6547/F., Dt. 11.2.1980 for Policemen and Fire Service personnel for such benefit will be applicable as amended from time to time.

(F.D. No. 10873/F., Dt. 19.03.1999)

85. Study leave to be sanctioned only where the course of study/training is in the interest of the State - General principle: The undersigned is directed to invite a reference to this Department Memo No. 4392/F., dated the 18th March, 1954, and No. 1401/F., dated the 31st January, 1952, on the subject noted above and to say that the position relating to the grant of study leave has been further reviewed by Government on the basis of decision taken in the meeting of the State Development & Co-ordination Committee held on 3rd January, 1954. After careful consideration, Government have been pleased to re-affirm the general principle already laid down that study leave can be granted to Government servants only when the course of study or training is demonstrably in the interest of the State or in the other words; when the knowledge or experience gained as a result is necessary for the execution of the various development schemes of the improvement of administration.

2. It has been decided that study leave will be admissible even when a Government servant takes up such study/training inside India under the various training schemes of international agencies like Rockfeller Foundation, U.N.T.A., Colombo Plan, etc., where Govt. are required to sponsor the candidates under the rules relating to these schemes. Those who attend courses or training aboard under the above schemes would, however, continue to be covered by deputation special leave terms laid down in the Finance Deptt. Resolution No. 4170/F., dtd. 4th March, 1954.

3. It has further been decided that persons who proceed abroad on their own initiative without being sponsored specifically by Government under the schemes of international agencies or otherwise will also be eligible to the study leave concession subject to the general principles enunciated in paragraph (1) above.

4. It is noticed that the procedure laid down in Finance Department Memo No. 4392/F., dated the 8th March, 1954, regarding selection of candidates and subjects for specialised training under the study leave scheme is not being scrupulously followed by some of the Departments and permission is being granted in certain cases on their own authority without placing the matter before the State Development & Co-ordination Committee which has taken the place of Inter-Departmental Committee of Secretaries regarding suitability of the candidate. This practice is irregular and should be discontinued forthwith. All cases where proposal for grant of study leave are considered by Department of Government should be referred to the State Development & Co-ordination Committee and the procedure laid down in Finance Department Memo No. 4692/F., dated the 8th March, 1954, regarding selection of subjects and candidates should be strictly followed. The Political & Service (Planning) Department will be Administrative Department in this regard and deal with the specific cases of study leave. Before each case in finally sanctioned however the Finance Department will have to be consulted. (F.D. No. 16304/F., Dt. 20.4.1954)

86. Leave to Government servants for undertaking higher study/training: At present, State Government employees are deputed for higher study/training on terms and conditions set out in Finance Department Memo No. 59/F., dated 1.1.1966. At times enterprising Government servants take initiative to arrange for themselves Fellowship/ Scholarship in different institutions for similar purposes. Cases of such Government servants are normally regulated by grant of Study Leave. But, at times, these officers claim the same terms as are given to the Government servants deputed by the State Government. This gives rise to representation which becomes difficult to decide. After careful consideration of the matter and keeping in view the liberalised terms introduced by the Government of India in the matter in of grant of Study Leave, the Governor has been pleased to lay down the following revised principles to regulate grant of pay, leave, etc., to Government servants who undertake higher study/ training, whether inside India and abroad.

2. (a) Officers who are either sponsored by the State Govt. or nominated by Govt. of India for higher study/training will be treated as on deputation.

(b) To be sponsored by State Govt. for higher study/training the officers will have to be selected by the Departmental Screening Committee.

(c) In case Government of India nominate a State Government officer for a particular course/training or study and the State Government agree to spare him, he will be treated to have been deputed by the State Govt.

(d) Officers treated as on deputation will be entitled to the full pay with Dearness Allowance as admissible while on duty before proceeding on deputation. Such a deputations may also be allowed any other facilities, Government may decide to allow in any particular case.

(e) In case of an officer sent on deputation for undertaking course of studies/training, extension of the period of deputation will not normally be allowed. If such an officer wishes to continue his studies/training in the Institution for a period beyond the period of deputation and his further study/training is considered useful in the interest of the State, he may be allowed to extend the period by taking leave due and admissible to him provided that the total period of absence of the officer from duty does not exceed 30 months.

3. (a) Where no initiate is taken by the State Govemment nor is there any nomination by the Government of India but the officer by his own efforts obtains Fellowship/Scholarship or only admission to any institution for undertaking higher study/training, he may be granted study leave provided the conditions laid down in the Odisha Service Code are satisfied and that the course of study/training is in approved course in a recognised institution and that such study/training is considered useful for improving the knowledge and skill of the officer in the fields of his work.

(b) The officer who is granted Study Leave for the purpose indicated above will be entitled to leave salary equal to the pay and Dearness Allowance admissible to him while on duty immediately before proceeding on Study Leave.

(c) In case the officer receives any Fellowship/Scholarship or any remuneration through part-time employment such amount will be adjusted against the leave salary payable subject to the condition that the balance of leave salary to be paid is not less than what is admissible during half-pay leave.

(d) He will not be entitled to any travelling allowance for journeys to and from the Institution.

(e) The journey time that will be required for joining the Institution and for returning from the Institution to the place of duty will be included in the period of Study Leave to be granted.

(f) The officer who is granted Study Leave may be allowed to continue the same study/training for a further period or undertake another course of study/training by taking leave due and admissible to him if such further study/training or such other study/training is considered useful in the interest of the State.

(g) In no case the period of Study Leave shall exceed two years in the entire service career of a Government servant nor shall the grant of Study Leave in combination with other kinds of leave except leave on medical certificate or Extraordinary Leave involve absence of the officer from duty for more than 30 months.

(h) No study allowance need be paid during Study Leave. (F.D. No. 22752/F., Dt. 01.05.1979)

87. Leave for Government servants sponsored by the Government for training, vis a vis., leave for Government servants who secure Fellowship, etc., on their own initiative: In Finance Deptt. Memo No. 22752 dated 1.5.1979 principles have been laid down for grant of pay, leave etc., to Government servants undertaking higher study/training in India and abroad. Difficulties are, however, still being experienced in some Deptt. in the application of these principles to cases involving deputation or Study Leave. The procedure to be followed in such cases is clarified below. 2. A distinction should be made between Government servants sponsored by the State Government or nominated by the Government of India for higher study/training and those who are not so sponsored or nominated but secure Fellowship/Scholarship/admission to institutions on their own initiative. Sanction of deputation/leave in the former case should be regulated by the stipulations of para 3 and in the latter by para 4 below..

3.(a) Government servants sponsored by the State Government or nominated by the Government of India for higher study/training should be treated as on deputation. Sponsoring should be only under programmes specifically by the Government and the sponsored candidates should be selected by a Departmental Committee.

(b) Govt. servants who are selected for deputation may be allowed full pay and dearness allowance admissible to them before proceeding on deputation. They may also be allowed such other facilities as Govt. may decide to grant.

(c) Extension of the period of deputation for study/training is ordinarily prohibited. A deputed Government servant intending to continue study/training beyond the period of deputation may however be allowed Study Leave due and admissible provided the study/training is considered useful in the interest of the State Govt. and the total period of absence from duty does not exceed 30 months.

4.(a) A Government servant who is not sponsored by the State Government nor nominated by the Government of India but secures a Fellowship/Scholarship/admission to an institution for higher study/. training by his own initiative may be granted Study Leave due and admissible under the Odisha Service Code provided the course of study/training is an approved course/training in a recognised institution and is considered useful for improving his knowledge and skill in the field of his work.

(b) A Government servant who is granted Study Leave will be entitled to leave salary equal to the pay and dearness allowance admissible to him while on duty immediately before proceeding on Study Leave.

(c) During Study Leave availed in India, payment of leave salary will be subject to furnishing a certificate by the Govt. servant that he is not in receipt of any Fellowship, scholarship, stipend or remuneration in respect of any part-time employment. Any such amount received during the period of Study Leave will be adjusted against the leave salary subject to the condition that the leave salary to be paid is not less than what is admissible during half-pay leave.

(d) A Government servant on Study Leave will not be entitled to any travelling allowance for journey to and from the institution or for other journeys performed for the purpose of study/training at the institution.

(e) The journey time required for joining the institution and for returning from the institution to the place of duty will be included in the period of Study Leave to be granted.

(f) A Govt. servant who is granted study leave may be allowed to continue the same study/training for a further period or undertake any other course of study/training by taking leave due and admissible to him if such study/training is considered useful in the interest of the State.

(g) The period of Study Leave shall not in any case exceed two years in the service career of the Government servant nor shall the total period of Study leave in combination with other kinds of leave on medical certificate or Extraordinary Leave involve his absence from the duty for more than thirty months.

(h) No study allowance will be paid during Study Leave. (

F.D. No. 38447/F., Dt. 29.07.1980)

88. Grant of Extraordinary Leave of Scheduled Caste/Tribe employees for purpose of coaching at Pre-examination Training Centres: The question of allowing leave benefit to the Government servants belonging to the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes to improve their service prospects by getting coaching at Pre-examination Training Centres for competitive examinations notified by the Government from time to time, has been under consideration of Government for sometime past.

2. After careful consideration, it has been decided that Government employees belonging to the S.C. and S.T. may, for the purpose of attending the Pre-examination Training Courses at the Centres notified by the Government from time to time, be granted Extraordinary Leave for the period of coaching in relaxation of the limit prescribed under Rule 13 (2) of Odisha Leave Rules, 1966.

(F.D. No. 8601/F., Dt. 02.03.1985)

89. Counting the period of study leave for increments Clarifications: According to paragraph 4 (6) of Finance Deptt. O.M. No. 88447/F., dated the 29th July, 1980, a Government servant who is granted study leave under Rule 179 of the Odisha Service Code is entitled to leave salary equal to the pay and allowance admissible to him on duty immediately before proceeding on study leave. It has come to the notice of Finance Deptt.that a doubt has arisen at some quarters as to whether the period of study will be taken into account while sanctioning increments.

2. According to the provisions contained in Rule 79 (b) (iv) of the Odisha Service Code leave other than Extraordinary leave will count for increment. Since study leave comes under the category of leave other than Extraordinary leave, it is clarified that the period of study leave sanctioned under Rule 179 of the Odisha Service Code will be taken into account for sanctioning increment in a time-scale and normal increment as due will be sanctioned during study leave.
A further doubt has arisen at some quarters as to whether by virtue of sanction of increment during the period of study leave the concerned Govt. servant can draw the increment amount during the period of study leave.

3. It is hereby clarified that during the period of leave, the Govt. servant is entitled to only leave salary which is equal to pay and allowance drawn by him immediately before proceeding on study leave. So in case of study leave, the date of increment of Govt. servant falls due during the period study leave, the increment will be sanctioned from the date. But the finance benefit arising out of grant of increment including arrear incremental pay will be allowed to him from the date he resumes his duties after expiry of study leave.

F.D. No. 8990/F., Dt. 12.03.1985) (

90. Study Leave for 3 years for Doctors of Health and F.W. Deptt. Rule 181 of the Odisha Service Code read with para 4 of the Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 38447-F., dated the 28th July, 1980, provide that the period of study leave shall not in any case exceed two years in the service career of the Government servant.

2. The above provision has been reviewed in case of the Doctors undergoing higher study and after careful consideration, Government have been pleased to decide that the study leave may be granted to the Doctors working under the Administrative Control of the H. & F.W. Department upto a maximum period of three years in the combination with other kinds of leave except leave on medical certificate or extraordinary leave, does not involve an absence from duty for more than 36 months.

3. The decision shall take effect from the date of issue of this order, Cases where study leave is continuing may be decided as per the above decision and cases where study leave has already been availed shall not be reopened.

4. Necessary amendment to the Odisha Service Code will be made in due course. (F.D. No. 44751/F., Dt. 16.11.1995)

91. Execution of Bond by Officers undergoing study leave/ higher study on leave due and admissible inside and outside the State but within the country: The undersigned is directed to say that Government servants undergoing study leave/higher study on leave due and admissible are required to execute a Bond which ensures proper utilisation of their service on return from study leave for a minimum period of five years under the State Government. Two sets of model bond forms (copies enclosed) one for permanent and other for temporary Government servants have been prescribed for execution by Officers before they are relieved to undergo study leave/higher study on leave due and admissible. The bank space in the Bond relating to the amount to be recovered, should be filed up with double the sum that is likely to be expended in respect of the. higher study of a candidate.
The Bonds are required to be compulsorily registered at the expenses of the candidate. Stamps Duty payable under article 15 of Schedule 1A of the Stamp Act will be charged in respect of bond prescribed for permanent Government servants and under article 57 of the above schedule from temporary Government servants.
It is requested that these instructions may kindly be given effect to strictly and the documents executed may be preserved by the concerned Administrative Department. (F.D. No. 6874/F., Dt. 20.02.1996)

92. Execution of Bond by the officers undergoing study leave/higher study on leave due and admissible inside and outside the State but within the Country Clarification regarding: The undersigned is directed to say that as per para (2) of Finance Department Circular No. 6874-F., dated the 20th February 1996, the officers undergoing study/higher study on leave due and admissible inside the Country are required to execute a Bond at their expense. A proposal for execution of Bonds by the officers without registration was under active consideration of Govt.
After careful consideration, the Govt. have been pleased to decide in modification of para (2) of the above Circular that the Bonds so prescribed shall henceforth be executed without registration. The Bonds pending for execution on the date of issue of this order will also require no registration. The case already decide in terms of above Circular shall not reopened for revision.

(F.D. No. 18014/F., Dt. 15.04.1998)

93. Study leave in America: The Government of Odisha have decided that the duties and functions entrusted to the High Commissioner for India in the United Kingdom under the Study Leave Rules contained in Chapter VI of the Odisha Service Code shall hence forward be performed by his Excellency the Ambassador for India in Washington in regard to Government servants on study leave in America.

(F.D. No. 11592/F., Dt. 17.08.1949)

94. Study leave is to be sanctioned only where the course of study/training is in the interest of the State: The undersigned is directed to invite a reference to this Department Memorandum No. 4392/F., dated the 18th March, 1954 and No. 1401/F., dated the 31st January, 1952, on the subject noted above, and to say that the position relating to the grant of Study Leave has been further reviewed by Government on the basis of decision taken in the meeting of the State Development and Co-ordination Committee held on 3rd January, 1954. After, careful consideration, Government have been pleased to re-affirm the general principles already laid down that study leave can be granted to Government servants only when the course of study or training is demonstrably in the interest of the state or in other words; when the knowledge or experience gained as a result is necessary for the execution of the various development schemes of the improvement of administration.

2. It has been decided that study leave will be admissible even when a Government servant takes up such study training inside India under the various training schemes of international agencies like Rock feller Foundation, U.N.T.A., Colombo Plant, etc., where Government are required to sponsor the candidate under the rules relating to these schemes. Those who attend courses or training abroad under the above schemes would, however, continue to be governed by deputation special leave terms laid down in the Finance Deptt. Resolution No. 4170/F., dtd. 4th March, 1954.

3. It has further been decided that persons who proceed abroad on their own initiative without being sponsored specifically by Government under the schemes of International Agencies or otherwise will also be eligible to the Study Leave concession subject to the general principles enunciated in paragraph (i) above.

4. It is noticed that the procedure laid down in Finance Department Memorandum No. 4392/F., dated the 8th March, 1954, regarding selection of candidates and subjects for specialised, training under the study leave scheme is not being scrupulously followed by some of the Departments and permission is being granted in certain cases on their own authority without placing the matter before the State Development and Co-ordination Committee which has taken the place of Inter-Departmental Committee of Secretaries regarding suitability of the candidate. This practice is irregular and should be discontinued forthwith. All cases where proposal for grant of study leave are considered by Departments of Government should be referred to State Developments and Co-ordination Committee and the procedure laid down in Finance Department Memo No. 4692/F., dated the 8th March, 1954, regarding selection of subjects and candidates should be strictly followed. The Political and Services (Planning) Department will be the Administrative Deptt. in this regard and deal with the specific cases of study leave. Before each case is finally sanctioned, however, the Finance Department will have to be consulted. (F.D. No. 16304/F., Dt. 20.04.1954)

95. Sanction of leave in favour of Government servants for undertaking higher study/training: At present, State Government employees are deputed for higher study/training on terms and conditions set out in Finance Department Memorandum No. 59/F., dated 1.1.1996. At times enterprising Government servants take initiative to arrange for the themselves Fellowship/Scholarship in different institutions for similar purposes. Cases of such Government servants are normally regulated by grant of Study Leave. But at times, these officers claim the same terms as are given to the Govt. servants deputed by the State Government. This gives rise to representation which becomes difficult to decide. After careful consideration of the matter and keeping in view the liberalised term introduced by the Government of India in the matter of grant of Study Leave, the Governor has been pleased to lay down the following revised principles to regulate grant of pay, leave, etc., the Govt. servants who undertake higher study/training, whether inside India or abroad. 

2. (a) Officers who are either sponsored by the State Government or nominated by Government of India for higher study/training will be treated as on deputation.

(b) To be sponsored by State Govt. for higher study/training the offices will have to be selected by the Departmental Screening Committee.

(c) In case Govt. of India nominate a State Govt. office for a particular course/training or study and the State Govt. agree to spare him, he will be treated to have been deputed by the State Govt.

(d) Officers treated as on deputation will be entitled to the full pay with Dearness Allowance as admissible while on duty before proceeding on deputation. Such a deputationist may also be allowed any other facilities, Government may decide to allow in any particular case.

(e) In case of an officer sent on deputation for undertaking course of studies/training, extension of the period of deputation will not normally be allowed. If such an officer wishes to continue has studies/ training in the institution for a period beyond the period of deputation and his further study/training is considered useful in the interest of the State, he may be allowed to extend the period by taking leave due and admissible to him provided that the total period of absence of the officer from duty does not exceed 30 minutes.

3. (a) Where no initiative is taken by the State Government nor is there any nomination by the Government of India but the Officer by his own efforts obtains Fellowship/Scholarship or only admission to any institution for undertaking higher study/training, he may be granted study leave provided the conditions laid down in the Odisha Service Code are satisfied and that the course of study/training is an approved course in a recognised institution and that such study/training is considered useful for improving the knowledge and skill of the officer in the fields of his work.

(b) The officer who is granted Study Leave for the purpose indicated above will be entitled to leave salary equal to pay and Dearness Allowance admissible to him while on duty immediately before proceeding on Study Leave.

(c) In case of the office receives any Fellowship/Scholarship or any remuneration through part-time employment such amount will be adjusted against the leave salary payable subject to the condition that the balance of leave salary to be paid is not less than what is admissible during half-pay leave.

(d) He will not be entitled to any travelling allowance for journeys to and from the Institution.

(e) The journey time what will be required for joining the Institution and for retiring from the Institution to the place of duty will be included in the period of Study Leave to be granted.

(f) The officer who is granted Study Leave may be allowed to continue to same study/training for a further period of undertake another course of study/training by taking leave due and admissible to him if such further study/training or such other study/training is considered useful in the interest of the State.

(g) In no case the period of Study Leave shall be exceed two years in the entire service career of a Government servant nor shall the grant of Study Leave in combination with other kinds of leave except leave on medical certificate or Extraordinary Leave involve absence of the officer from duty for more than 30 minutes.

(h) No study allowance need be paid during Study Leave.

(F.D. No. 22752/F., Dt. 01.05.1979)

96. Principles laid down for deputation of Government Servants for undergoing higher study/training: In Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 19230/F., dated the 6th May, 1988, it has been laid down that special allowance would be admissible to Government servants deputed on training being sponsored by State Government or nominated by Government of India. A question has been raised as to whether a Government servant, who is deputed to undergo higher study being sponsored by State Govt. or nominated by Government of India, will be entitled to get the special allowance during the period of higher study.

The matter has been carefully considered by Government and it is hereby clarified that the special allowance, as admissible in case of deputation on training, will also be admissible in case of deputation on higher study by treating the period of higher study as a course of instruction or training with the meaning of Rule 13 (b) (i) of the Odisha Service Code. (F.D. No. 10869/F., Dt. 25.03.1991)

97. Clarification in respect of counting the period of study for increment: According to paragraph 4 (b) of Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 88447/F., dated 29th July, 1980, a Government servant who is granted study leave under Rule 179 of the Odisha Service Code is entitled to leave salary equal to pay and allowance admissible to him on duty immediately before proceeding on study leave. It has come to the notice of Finance Deptt. that a doubt has arisen at some quarters as to whether the period of study leave will be taken into account while sanctioning increments.

2. According to the provisions contained in Rule 79 (b) (iv) of the Odisha Service Code leave other than Extraordinary leave will count for increment, Since study leave comes under the category of leave other than Extraordinary leave, it is clarified that the period of study leave sanctioned under Rule 179 of the Odisha Service Code will be taken into account for sanctioning increment in a time-scale and normal increment as due will be sanctioned during study leave.

(F.D. No. 8990/F., Dt. 12.03.1985)

98. Drawl of increments during the period of study leave: A further doubt has arisen at some quarters as to whether by virtue of sanction of increment during the period of study leave the concerned Government servant can draw the incremental amount during the period of study leave.

2. It is hereby clarified that during the period of leave, the Government servant is entitled to only leave salary which is equal to pay and allowance drawn by him immediately before proceeding on study leave. So in case the date of increment of Government servant falls due during the period of study leave the increment will be sanctioned from that date. But the financial benefit arising out of grant of increment including arrear incremental pay will be allowed to him from the date he resumes his duties after expiry of study leave.

(F.D. No. 2515/F., Dt. 17.07.1985)

99. Maternity leave counts for increment: The undersigned is directed to say that the question of allowing Maternity Leave granted to temporary female Government servants under the provision of Rule 194 of the Odisha Service Code to count towards increment in temporary and officiating service have been engaging the attention of Government for some time past. After careful consideration, it has been decided that Maternity Leave granted to female Government servants under the Note below Rule 194 may be allowed to count for increments in the post in which the Government servant was officiating at the time of proceeding on such leave provided it is certified by the appointing authority that the Govt. servant concerned would have continued to officiate in that post but for proceeding on such leave. (F.D. No. 35146/F., Dt. 30.11.1960)

100. Maximum limit for Maternity Leave 90 days: The question of simplifying and rationalising the rules relating to admissibility of Maternity Leave to female Government servants was under consideration of Government for some time past. After careful consideration the Governor has been pleased to decide that the following modifications in Rule 194 of the Odisha Service Code may be made.

(i) Grant of Maternity Leave under sub-rule (b) of Rule 194 of the Odisha Service Code shall be for a period of 90 days from the date of its commencement in all cases, l.e., it shall not be restricted to six weeks from the date of confinement as at present.

(ii) Note below sub-rule (e) of the aforesaid rule may be treated as deleted. As a result, the female Government servants who have not rendered even one year's continuous service are also eligible for Maternity Leave under this rule.

(iii) Maternity Leave may also be granted in case of miscarriage, including abortion, subject to the conditions that -

(a) the leave does not exceed six weeks; and

(b) the application for leave is supported by a certificate as laid down in Rules. Abortion included under the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 should also be considered as a case of 'abortion' for the purpose of granting 'Maternity Leave' under the aforesaid rule...

(F. D. No. 63452/F., Dt. 13.12.1977)

101. Female Government servant having less than two surviving children entitled to Maternity Leave In terms of the provision of Rule 194 (f) of the Odisha Service Code (incorporated by Finance Department Notification No. 35913/F., dated 17.8.1984) no Maternity Leave is admissible to a female Govt. servant for the third and subsequent issues.

The matter was under examination for sometime past and after careful consideration, the Governor has been pleased to decide in modification to the above provision that Maternity Leave shall be granted to a female Government servant who is having less than two surviving children.

(F.D. No. 42786/F., Dt. 18.10.1992)

102. Certificate from private registered medical practitioner may be accepted: In partial modification of the orders contained in Sub-para (iii) of Para 1 of this Department OM No. 14115/F., dated the 28th May, 1958, on the subject noted above, Govt. have been pleased to decide that in support of applications for grant of Maternity Leave on account of miscarriage (including abortion), the medical certificate granted by a private registered medical practitioner may be accepted.

The certificate of a Civil Surgeon or a Gazetted Medical Officer may, however, be called for in cases of doubt.

(F.D. No. 26950/F., Dt. 05.08.1961)

103. Grant of Commuted Leave to Government servants who are unable to return to duty: As per provisions under Rule 9 (3) of the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966 Commuted Leave is granted on Medical Certificate only to a permanent Govt. servant. According to the proviso under the said rule, no Commuted Leave shall be granted unless the leave sanctioning authority has reason to believe that the concerned Govt, servant will return to duty on expiry of leave.

2. Instances have come to notice, where Government servants on long leave on medical ground are either unable to return to duty before the date of their retirement due to prolonged illness or die while on Earned Leave and undergoing medical treatment. In the latter case Government have decided to treat the period of Earned leave availed by the deceased Government servant immediately before his death, as Commuted Leave, if otherwise admissible.

3. Since non-sanction of Commuted Leave causes a lot of hardship to the Government servants who retire from service while undergoing medical treatment for fatal diseases like Cancer, etc., the Governor has been pleased to decide that Commuted Leave, if admissible otherwise, may be allowed in such cases even though the concerned Government servant does not return to duty after expiry to the leave.

(F.D. No. 55707/F., Dt. 17.11.1986)

104. Grant of Commuted Leave to temporary employees also: According to Rule 9 (3) of the Odisha Leave Rules, Commuted Leave is granted on production of medical certificate only to a Govt. servant in permanent employ subject to other conditions prescribed thereunder.

2. The above matter has been reviewed and after careful consideration, Government have been pleased to decide that Commuted Leave may be granted to a Government servant irrespective of the fact whether he/she is in permanent or temporary employee subject to fulfillment of other conditions prescribed under the relevant rules.

(F. D. No. 21277/F., Dt. 24.05.1988)

105. Revised classification of encashment of un-utilised leave salary: The undersigned is directed to say that, Government have been pleased to decide that encashment of Leave Salary on Superannuation/ death/termination of service of Government employees shall be debited hence forward under the Major head "2071-Pensioners and other retirement benefit-01-Civil-115- Leave encashment benefits under Demand No. 5 (Non-plan) as per the revised accounting procedure prescribed by Government of India on the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and Accountant-General (A & E), Odisha, Bhubaneswar.

2. Accordingly funds have been provided in the Budget Estimate for 2001-2002 under the above Head of Account. the D.D.Os. under the Administrative control of the Departments/Heads of Department/District Offices may therefore be suitably instructed to incur expenditure under the aforesaid major head for payments of leave 'encashment benefits to the concerned Government Servant in case of retirement/death/termination of service and not under the head to which his/her salary is being debited.

3. However, encashment of leave salary/surrender leave salary during the service period should continue to be classified under the object head "salary" below the Major Head to which the salary of the concerned Government employee is being debit. 

4. All the Drawing and Disbursing Officers under their administrative control may be instructed accordingly.

5. This revised procedure shall come into force with effect from 01.04.2001.

6. All controlling Officers are being informed.

(F.D. No. 27434(230)/F., Dt. 12.04.2001)

106. Unauthorised absence beyond the admissible period of leave: The undersigned is directed to say that according to Rule 72 (2) of the Odisha Service Code and Rule 13 (4) of the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966, where a Government servant does not resume his duty after expiry of the maximum period of leave/E.O.L. admissible to him under the Rules, he shall unless the State Government in view of exceptional circumstances of the case otherwise determine, be removed from service after following the procedure laid down in Odisha Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1962. Instances have, however, come to the notice of Finance Department that the above provisions are not being followed in most of the cases and Government servants are allowed to join duty after remaining absent unauthorisedly for longer periods than those permissible under rules referred to above and thereafter, proposals are being sent to this Department to regularise such unauthorised absence without taking recourse under the Odisha Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules 1962.

2. With a view to prevent the recurrence of such incidents, it is requested that provisions contained in rule 72 (2) of the OSC and Rule 13 (4) of the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966, should meticulously be followed in cases of unauthorised absence exceeding the limit prescribed under these rules and disciplinary action under the relevant provisions of Odisha C.C.A. Rules, 1962 should initiated in such cases at the appropriate stage. (F.D. No. 50727/F., Dt. 29.12.1984)

107. Credit in the Leave Account of an officer serving in the Vacation Department: It has been brought to the notice of the Government that no uniformity is maintained in the matter of giving credit in the Leave Account of an officer serving in the Vacation Department when he proceeds on leave before completing a full year of duty. To bring uniformity in this regard it has now been decided that the following procedure should be followed in respect of officers govermed under Rule 163 of Odisha Service Code, and Rule 4 of the Liberalisation of Leave Rules.

(i) When no vacation falls within the incomplete year of service the Government servant is entitled to leave earned at the rate of 1/11 during that period of duty as reduced by 1/12 of that period. The credit so afforded will be corrected suitably if later on it transpires that officer has availed of either proportionately or has not availed of at all the vacations which fell during the full year.

(ii) When vacation falls within the incomplete year but is partially enjoyed, the proportion 15 days, or 30 days, as the case may be, which should be deducted from the leave account is the proportion which the vacation actually enjoyed plus the vacation that will fall within the remaining period of twelve months bears to the whole period of vacations which fall within the period of twelve months.

(iii) When the vacation; falls within the incomplete year but is fully enjoyed, the fraction of 15 days or 30 days, as the case may be, which should be deducted from the leave account is the fraction which the period of duty including vacation bears to the whole period of duty (including vacation).

The expression 'each year of duty' occurring in Rule 139 of Odisha Service Code, should be held as period of twelve months beginning on the date following the date on which he completed the previous year of duty and exclusive of leave.

(F.D. No. 19102/F., Dt. 20.05.1961)

108. Benefit of encashment of unutilsed EL/HPL to Government servant on voluntary retirement: In Finance Department Memorandum No. 2281/F., dated 12.1.1981, it was provided that a Government servant who is allowed to retire voluntarily or is made to retire from Govt. service in public interest under Rule 71 (b) of the Odisha Service Code or is retired on the ground of invalidation on the advice of Medical Authority under Rule 18 of Appendix 13 of Odisha Service Code would be entitled to cash equivalent of leave salary in respect of leave including half-pay leave at his credit on the date of such retirement subject to the condition that cash equivalent of leave salary payable in respect of Earned Leave shall be limited to 180 days. Subsequently, in Finance Deptt. Memorandum No. 31940/F., dated 26.4.1984, it was also provided that encashment of E.L due and admissible in the above mentioned cases shall be subject to maximum of 180 days, even if this exceeds the date of normal retirement of superannuation.

2. The question of extending the benefit of encashment of unutilised leave to the Government servants who retire after rendering not less than 20 years of qualifying service under the Voluntary retirement Scheme as envisaged in Finance Deptt. Office Memorandum No. 10516/F., dated 28.2.1978 was under consideration of Govt. for some time past.

3. After careful consideration, the Governor has been pleased to decide that the benefit of encashment of unutilised EL/HPL as has been allowed to Government servant who retires voluntarily under Rule 71 (a) of O.S.C. shall also be allowed to those Government servants who have retired voluntarily under the Voluntary Retirement Scheme as per Finance Department Memorandum No. 10516/F., dated 28.2.1978 on or after 31.12.1980 and that the conditions and restrictions as laid down in the Office Memorandum dated 12.7.1981 and 26.7.1984 referred to above shall apply to them.

(F.D. No. 26943/F., Dt. 12.07.1985)

109. Payment of cash equivalent of leave can be withheld for adjustment: The benefit of cash equivalent of unutilised leave salary is now admissible to a Government servant in case of death in service, retirement on superannuation, voluntary retirement, etc., subject to the conditions, prescribed under the existing instructions. A question has arisen as to whether such cash equivalent of leave salary can be withheld by the competent authority in case of such a Government servant for possible adjustment of Government dues against him.

2. The matter has been examined and after careful consideration, it is hereby clarified that the authority competent to grant leave may, in case of Government servant who ceases to be in Government service by death/ retirement or otherwise and for which the benefit of cash payment in lieu of unutilised leave is permissible, withhold whole or part of the cash equivalent of unutilised leave salary, if in the opinion of such authority, there is a possibility of some money becoming recoverable from his/her on conclusion of the disciplinary/criminal proceedings against him/her or on regularisation of the period of suspension during service, on conclusion of the proceedings or the regularisation of the period of suspension, such a Government servant will, however, become eligible to the amount so withheld after adjustment of Government dues, if any.

(F.D. No. 46545/F., Dt. 17.12.1991)

110. Leave encashment benefit is to be granted suo motu in case of retirement/death/voluntary retirement/ invalidation: In terms of Para, (f) of the Finance Government Office Memorandum No. 2281/F., dated 12th January 1981 a Government servant who is retired on the ground invalidation is required to apply for cash equivalent of unutilised leave salary before the date of such retirement.

2. The above provision has been reviewed in the light of the decision made by Government of India and after careful consideration, Government have been pleased to decide that the leave encashment benefit may be granted su motu by the competent authority in cases of death while in service, retirement on superannuation, voluntary retirement and retirement on ground of invalidation without waiting for any application in this regard subject to the provisions contained in Finance Department Office Memorandum NO. 46545/F., dated the 17th December 1991.

3. The above decision shall come into force from the date of issue of this order. The cases pending with the authority will be decided in terms of this order.

4. Necessary amendment to the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966 will be made in due course. (F.D. No. 34074/F., Dt. 04.09.1995)

111. Allowance for studies abroad during the periods of vacation: The undersigned is directed to invite a reference to Rule 188 of the Odisha Service Code according to which study allowance is admissible to Government servants undergoing studies abroad up to fourteen days for any period of vacation. It is understood that this restriction regarding admissibility of study allowance during the period of vacation has caused considerable hardship to State Government officers who are undergoing studies in foreign countries under study leave terms. Government have allowed to draw study allowance for the entire period of vacation during the course of study subject to the conditions that (i) he attends during vacation any special course of study or practical training, if so required by Government or other competent authority; and (ii) in the absence of any such direction, produces satisfactory evidence before the High Commissioner for India in the United Kingdom, or in the case of Government servants on study leave in America, the Ambassador for India in Washington that he has continued his studies during the vacation. No study allowance may, however, be drawn during a vacation falling at the end of course of study except for a maximum period of 14 days. The period of vacation during which study allowance is drawn shall be taken into account in calculating the maximum period of two years for which study allowance is admissible.

2. The following other decisions have also been taken in regard to the payment of study allowance -

(a) The certificate of attendance required to be submitted in support of claims for study allowance may be produced at the end of the terms if a Government servant is undergoing study in an educational institution, or at intervals not exceeding three months, if he is undergoing study at any other institution.

(b) Study allowance may be paid at the end of every month provisionally, subject to an undertakings in writing being obtained from the Government servant that he would refund to Government any over payment, consequent on his failure to produce the required certificate of attendance or otherwise.

(c) If the Government servant resigns or retires from service without returning to duty after a period of study leave or at any time within a period of five years after his return to duty, he will be required to refund the study allowance, cost of fees, travelling and other expenses drawn by him before his resignation is accepted or permission to retire is granted. The study leave already availed of by such a Government servant will be converted into regular leave to the extent of the regular leave, standing at his credit on the date on which study leave commenced, any regular leave taken in continuation of study leave being also suitably adjusted for the purpose. The balance of the period of study leave, if any, which cannot be so converted will be treated as extraordinary leave. (F.D. No. 39745/F., Dt. 26.10.1962)

112. Leave for Government servants sponsored by the Government for training, vis-a-vis, leave for Government servants who secure Fellowship, etc., on their own initiative: In Finance Deptt. Memo. No. 22752 dated 1.5.1979 principles have been laid down for grant of pay, leave, etc., to Govt. servants undertaking higher study, training in India and abroad. difficulties are, however, still being experienced in some Deptt. in the application of these principles to cases involving deputation or Study Leave. The procedure to be followed in such cases is clarified below.

2. A distinction should be made between Government servants sponsored by the State Government or nominated by the Government of India for higher study/training and those who are not so sponsored or nominated but secure Fellowship/Scholarship/admission to institutions on their own initiative. Sanction of deputation/leave in the former case should be regulated by the stipulations of para 3 and in the latter by para 4 below.

3. (a) Government servants sponsored by the State Government or nominated by the Government of India for higher study/training shouid be treated as on deputation. Sponsoring should be only under programmes specifically approved by the Government and the sponsored candidates should be selected by a Departmental Screening Committee.

(b) Govt. servants who are selected for deputation may be allowed full pay and dearness allowance admissible to them before proceeding on deputation. They may also be allowed such other facilities as Govt. may decide to grant.

(c) Extension of the period of deputation for study/training is ordinarily prohibited. A deputed Government servant intending to continue study/training beyond the period of deputation may however be allowed Study Leave due and admissible provided the study/training is considered useful in the interest of the State Government and the total period of absence form duty does not exceed 30 months.

4. (a) A Government servant who is not sponsored by the State Government nor nominated by the Government of India but secures a Fellowship/Scholarship/admission to an institution for higher study/training by his own initiative may be granted Study Leave due and admissible under the Odisha service Code provided the course of study/training is an approved course/training in a recognised institution and is considered useful for improving his knowledge and skill in the field of his work.

(b) A Government servant who is granted Study Leave will be entitled to leave salary equal to pay and dearness allowance admissible to him while on duty immediately before proceeding on Study Leave.

(c) During Study Leave availed in India, payment of leave salary will be subject to furnishing a certificate by the Government servant that he is not receipt of any Fellowship, scholarship, stipend or remuneration in respect of any part-time employment. Any such amount received during the period of Study Leave will be adjusted against the leave salary subject to the condition that the leave salary to be paid is not less than what is admissible during half-pay leave.

(d) A Government servant on Study Leave will not be entitled to any travelling allowance for journeys to and from the institution or for other journeys performed for the purpose of study/training at the institution.

(e) The journey time required for joining the institution and for returning from the institution to the place of duty will be included in the period of Study Leave to be granted.

(f) A Government servant who is granted study leave may be allowed to continue the same study/training for a further period or undertake any other course of study/training by taking leave due and admissible to him is such study/training is considered useful in the interest of the State.

(g) The period of Study Leave shall not in any case exceed two years in the service career of the Government servant nor shall the total period of Study Leave in combination with other kinds of leave on medical certificate or Extraordinary Leave involve his absence from duty for more than thirty months.

(h) No study allowance will be paid during Study Leave. (F. D. No. 38447/F., Dt. 29.07.1980)

113. Extraordinary Leave either before commen-cement of the training or before resuming duties after training: Under Rule 13 (3) of the Odisha Service Code Leave Rules, 1996 a Government servant not in permanent employment may be granted during deputation on training Extraordinary Leave from the date of his relief till the date of resumption of duties on retum from training subject to fulfillment of other conditions laid down in this rule. Doubts have arisen as to whether in case where a Govemment servant avails leave either before commencement of the training or before resuming duties under Government after return from training on ground of ill health will also be covered by Rule 13 (3) and the entire period treated as Extraordinary Leave. 

2. It is hereby clarified that the intention of Rule 13 (3) of O.L.R. 1966 is to specify the maximum period for which Extraordinary Leave can be granted to a temporary Government servant for the purpose of undergoing training and it is not intended to treat the entire period of absence from the date of relief till the date of resumption of duties as Extraordinary Leave. The leave of absence availed by Government servants on ground of illness before joining the training or after relief from training till resumption of duties may be regularised by grant of leave due and admissible. Such cases should be referred to Government and the authority sanctioning leave must satisfy himself that the grounds are genuine and that the concerned servant has furnished adequate proof in support of his illness.

(F. D. No. 6828/F., Dt. 12.02.1982)

114. Payment of leave salary in advance: The undersigned is directed to say that Government have had under consideration the recommendation of the Pay Committee in paragraph 14 (2) of Chapter XVII of report that up to a month's leave salary may be allowed in advance to Govemment servants proceeding on leave.

It has been decided to accept the recommendation of the Pay Committee subject to the following conditions-

1. No advance may be granted when the leave taken is for less than month/30 days.

2. The amount of the advance should be restricted to the amount of leave salary for the last month of leave that is clearly admissible to the Govt. servant after deductions on account of Income Tax, Provident Fund, House-rent, repayment of advances, etc., so that there is no financial risk involved. The advance of leave salary will not include allowances.

3. The advance should be adjusted in full in the leave salary bill in respect of leave availed of. In case where the advance cannot be so adjusted in full, the balance will be recovered from the next payment of pay/or/and leave salary.

4. The advance may be sanctioned by the Head of Office or by any other subordinate officer to whom the power may be specially delegated both in case of Gazetted and non-Gazetted Officers.

5. Officers who are Heads of Offices may sanction the advance to themselves. (F.D. No. 20513/F., Dt. 07.06.1961)

115. Provisional payment of leave salary to Gazetted Government servants: A question has arisen whether the concession of provisional payment of leave salary for a period not exceeding one month admissible to Gazetted Government servants under this Department Office Memorandum No. 39301/F., dated the 16th November, 1961 as extended in Office Memorandum No. 2655/F., dated the 20th January, 1962, is permissible in the case of leave preparatory to retirement and refused leave. It is clarified that this concession is permissible in such cases. However, before a provisional leave salary certificate is issued in such case, an undertaking for recovery of the leave salary, if any, paid in excess, should be taken from the Government servant concerned.

(F.D. No. 11353/F., Dt. 31.03.1977),

116. Disbursement of leave salary in advance to Government servants who avail of leave on reversion from foreign service: The undersigned is directed to invite a reference to this Department Office Memorandum No. 20513/F., dated 7th June, 1961 regarding payment of leave salary in advance and to state that a question has been raised as to how and by whom the advance of leave salary shall be paid in respect of a Government servant on foreign service.

2. It has been decided that the advance of leave salary in respect of Govt. servants who avail of leave during or on reversion from foreign service shall be paid by the foreign employer without any specific authority/orders from the Accounts Officer/competent authority for the drawl of the advance.

3. The payment of advance to Government servants on foreign service in India will be subject to the observance of the following procedure -

(i) As soon as the foreign employer pays the advance, he should place demand on the Accountant General/Head of Office responsible for authorising/drawing leave salary duly supported by the cash receipt obtained from the officer.

(ii) The Accountant General/Head of Office should check the correctness of the amount paid as advance and refund the amount of the advance to the foreign employer by means of a bank draft. If it is found that the advance already paid by the foreign employer is more than the correct amount admissible under rules, the Accountant-General/ Head of Office should reimburse only the correct amount and request the foreign employer to recover the balance from Govt. servant direct.

(iii) The amount of bank draft should be classified under the final head to which the leave salary is debitable.

(iv) Suitable entries should also be made by Accountant General in his objection book and the Audit Register for watching the adjustment of the advance in usual course. Likewise, the Head of Office should keep appropriate note in his records to watch the adjustment of the advance from the final leave salary.

(v) The foreign employer should indicate in the Last Pay Certificate the outstanding advance so that the recovery of the same is not less sight of by Accountant General/ Head of Office. (F.D. No. 35922/F., Dt. 17.09.1962)

117. Grant of refused leave after compulsory retirement Clarifications regarding: In view of the considerable liberalisation in the matter of counting of service and reckoning of emoluments for pension in respect of officers retiring on or after the 1st March, 1961, Government have been pleased to decide that grant of refused leave to a Govt. servant under Rule 162 of Odisha Service Code or under Rule 5 of the Odisha Leave Rules immediately after the date of compulsory retirement on the expiry of the extension of service granted to him should not be treated as carrying with it automatic extension of service as provided in the Note below Rule 71 of the Code and he should not be allowed to retain a lien on his post during the period of such leave. Necessary amendments to the Code are being issued separately.

2. The following other decisions and clarifications are made in this connection:

(a) A Government servant who avails himself of the refused leave in full or in part immediately after the date of his compulsory retirement or on the expiry of the extension of service, will be deemed, for the purpose other than thereof pensionary/Contributory Provident Fund benefits and lien, to be in service till the of the leave so availed. He will retire and become eligible for all pensionary benefits as due to him on the date of superannuation or such other later date if any extension of service is granted, from the date of expiry of such leave only. Permanent arrangement may be made in the chain of vacancies caused by the grant of such leave and the leave reserve, if any, provided in the cadre need not be taken to cover the vacancies caused by the grant of this leave.

(b) A Government servant who had not the opportunity to avail of the refused leave either in whole or in part immediately after retirement on account of his re-employment may avail of such leave either during the period of re-employment or after the termination of the period re-employment.

(c) Where a Government servant is re-employed while on refused leave taken immediately after the date of compulsory retirement or on the expiry of the extension of service, he may avail of the period of refused leave concurrently with his re-employment. The leave salary that will be payable during refused leave so availed of shall be regulated in accordance with this Department Memo. No. 11461/F., dated the 16th June, 1953 as modified in this Deptt. Meno. No. 18704/F., dated the 26th May, 1958.

(d) Where the refused leave is taken during the period of re-employment but not immediately after the date of compulsory retirement or the date of expiry of extension of service, as the case may be, the leave salary that will be payable during the period of refused leave so availed of, shall be the same as would have been admissible in the normal course but for re-employment reduced by the amount of pension and pension equivalent of gratuity and other retirement benefits. He will not be entitled to draw his re-employment salary during the period of the refused leave so availed of. The grant of such leave during the period of re-employment is, however, conditional on the re-employing authority being able to grant any part of the refused leave during the sanctioned period of re-employment.

(e) Where the refused leave is taken the termination of a period of re-employment the leave salary shall be the same as admissible under sub-paragraph (d) above.

(f) The leave salary for the refused leave which is permitted to be availed of either during or on termination of the period of re-employment should be borne by the Deptt. which could have borne it had the leave been availed of immediately after the retirement. (F.D. No. 14669/F., Dt. 08.04.1963)

118. Joining time for a Government servant appointed to a new post while on leave: Under rule 206 of the Odisha Service Code, joining time for a Govt. servant appointed to a new post while on leave on average pay of not more than four months' duration is calculated from his old station or from the place at which he receives the order of appointment, whichever entitles him to less joining time.
A question has arisen how joining time should be calculated for a Government servant who retains his establishment at the old headquarters during leave and returns to that place for winding up personal affairs, before joining at new headquarters. It has been decided that in such a case the officer concerned should be allowed joining time as admissible under rule 200 of the Odisha Service Code from old headquarters to new headquarters.

A certificate to this effect that the Government servant had actually performed the journey from the station where he was spending leave to old headquarters for winding up personal affairs should be furnished by the officer concerned with his charge report for assumption of the post at the new headquarters. The responsibility for obtaining the certificate from a Gazetted officer would rest with the audit officer concerned and for non-gazetted staff, with the Head of Office.

(F.D. No. 3708/F., Dt. 05.02.1963)

119. Regulation of joining time a Government servant who takes leave on average pay of not more than 4 months' duration on medical certificate while in transit from one post to another: It has been decided by the Government of Odisha that the principle underlying Rule 137 (b) of the Service Code is also applicable to the balance of joining time admissible on return from leave in the case of Government servant who proceeds on leave on average pay for a period not exceeding 4 months on medical certificate while in transit from one post to another. The balance of joining time to which the Government servant will be entitled is the full joining time admissible under Rule 198 (b) (i) of the Odisha Service Code reduced by the period of joining time actually avoided of prior to the commencement of leave on medical certificate under Rule 205 ibid. If the Government servant joins the new appointment before the expiry of such leave, plus the balance of joining time due to him, the leave should be adjusted on the basis of the principle laid down in Rule 137 (b).

(F.D. No. 21554/F., Dt. 30.08.1956)

120. Grant of half day's casual leave to State Government Employees: The State Government have had under consideration for sometime past the need for introduction of a provision for grant of half day's casual leave in view of the fact that on certain occasions a Government servant may have some urgent private work either in the forenoon or in the after-noon session of the office hours, which does not require a full day's casual leave.

2. After careful consideration, Government have been pleased to decide that half day's casual leave may be allowed to a Government servant, if applied for to attend to any urgent private work under the same terms and conditions as envisaged in Rule 4 of Appendix-6 to the Odisha Service Code for grant of casual leave including special casual leave. For grant of half day's casual leave, the lunch-break is to be treated as the dividing line i.e. a Govt. servant who takes half day's casual leave for the fore-noon session is required to come to the office at 2.00 P.M. Similarly if a Govt. servant take half day's casual leave for the after-noon session, he may be allowed to leave office at 1.30 P.M. Half day's casual leave may be granted in conduction with full day's casual leave subject to the maximum limit prescribed under Rule 2 (a) of Appendix- 6 to the Odisha Service Code.

3. These orders will take effect from 1st August 1994.

4. Necessary amendment to the relevant rules of the Odisha Service Code will be made separately. (F.D. No. 25168/F., Dt. 15.07.1994)

121. Payment of cash equivalent of leave salary to Government servants on voluntary/premature retirement on grounds of invalidation: Government have had under consideration the question of extending the concession of payment of cash equivalent of leave salary in respect of leave at the credit of a Govt. servant who retires voluntarily or is retired from service other than as a measure of punishment or who is retired on grounds of invalidation.

2. After careful consideration it has been decided that a Government servant who retires voluntarily or is retired by Government under Rule 71 of the Odisha Service Code or who is retired on grounds of invalidation on the advice of a medical authority under Rule 18 of Appendix 13 of the Odisha Service Code shall be entitled to cash equivalent of the leave salary in respect of the leave including half-pay leave at credit on the date of such retirement from service subject to the following conditions :-

(a) The cash equivalent of leave salary payable in respect of the earned leave shall be limited to 180 days.

(b) The leave in respect of which such payment is made should not extend beyond his normal date of retirement on superannuation.

(c) The cash equivalent of leave salary for the entire period of such leave shall be paid in lump sum as one-time settlement.

(d) The cash equivalent of leave salary payable shall include dearness allowance at the rates in force on the date of retirement. No compensatory or house rent allowance shall be included in Calculation of the cash equivalent of leave salary.

(e) The leave salary for the half-pay leave component of the leave so granted will be subject to deduction on account of pension and pensionary equivalent or other retirement benefits.

(f) A Government servant who is retired on grounds of invalidation shall be entitled to cash equivalent of leave salary in respect of leave at credit on the date of such retirement, provided he applies for the same before retirement. Leave for which the lump sum benefit is allowed shall not extend beyond the normal date of retirement (on superannuation).

(g) A Government servant who is retired by Government by giving him pay and allowances in lieu of notice may have to apply for leave encashment benefit within the period for which such pay and allowances were given and shall be entitled to leave salary only for the period of leave excluding that period for which pay and allowances in lieu of notice have been allowed.

(h) A Government servant who has been permitted by Government to voluntarily retire from service while under suspension or who is retired by Government in public interest while under suspension shall be paid cash equivalent of leave salary in respect of earned leave and half-pay leave standing to his credit on the date of retirement from service, provided that in the opinion of the authority competent to order reinstatement, the incumbent has been exonerated of all charges and the suspension was wholly unjustified.

3. Persons who are compulsorily retired as a measure of punishment under the Odisha Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1962, will not be governed by these orders.

4. The benefit under these orders will be admissible to Govemment servants retiring from service on or after 31.12.1980. (F.D. No. 2281/F., Dt. 12.01.1981)

122. Benefit of subsequent enhancement of pay/D.A. should be allowed: In terms of paragraph 3 (b) of Finance Department O.M. No. 60319-F., dated the 28th November 1977, the cash equivalent of leave salary in lieu of unutilised earned leave is payable in one lump sum as a one- time settlement. A doubt has arisen whether a retired Government servant who has been paid the cash equivalent of leave salary for unutilised earned leave, is entitled to the enhanced amount of such leave salary and D.A./A.D.A. thereon which becomes due on account of subsequent revision in Pay/D.A./A.D.A. sanctioned by Government with retrospective effect.

2. As per paragraph 3 (c) of the above O.M. cash payment in respect of unutilised earned leave will be equal to leave salary as admissible for eamed leave and dearness allowance admissible on that leave salary at the rates in force on the date of retirement. A Government servant who is retired from service is entitled, on the date of his retirement, to the enhanced pay, D.A. and A.D.A. sanctioned by Government, with retrospective effect if such enhancement comes into force from a date earlier to or from the date of retirement of the Government servant.

3. Accordingly it is clarified that leave salary in respect of unutilised eamed leave calculated on such enhanced pay and enhanced D.A/A.D.A. in will also be admissible to retired Government servants of whether the payment at old rates has been made or not.

4. The above decision will also be applicable to the families of deceased Government servants under Finance Department O.M. No. 441-F; dated the 3rd January 1978 as well as to Government servants availing the benefit of unutilised earned leave on voluntary/premature retirement as per Finance Department O.M. No. 2281-F., dated the 12th January, 1981. (F.D. No. 9990/F., Dt. 12.03.1983)

123. Clarification in respect of cash equivalent of leave salary: In Finance Department No. 441/F., dated 3.1.1978, the Governor has been pleased to decide that cash equivalent of accumulated leave up to a maximum period of 180 days shall be payable to the family of the deceased where a Govt. servant dies while in service.

Further it is clarified that cash equivalent of leave salary shall not be subject to reduction on account of Pension and Pension equivalent of Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity.

Note: The limit has been raised to 240 days E.L. with effect from 1st July, 1986 vide Finance Department No. 55423/F., dated the 14th November, 1986. Further the limit a un-utilised has been enhanced up to 300 days vide Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 45439, dated the 27th September, 2002. (F. D. No. 20764/F., Dt. 22.04.1978)

124. Payment of cash equivalent of leave salary to Government servants on voluntary/premature retirement: Government have had under consideration the question of extending the concession of payment of cash equivalent of leave salary in respect of leave at the credit of a Government servant who retires voluntarily or is retired from service other than as a measure of punishment or who is retired on ground of invalidation.

2. After careful consideration it has been decided that a Govt. servant who retires voluntarily or is retired by Govt. under Rule 71 of the Odisha Service Code or who is retired on grounds of invalidation on the advice of a medical authority under Rule 18 of Appendix 13 of the OSC shall be entitled to cash equivalent of the leave salary in respect of the leave including half-pay leave at credit on the date of such retirement from service subject to the following conditions:

(a) The cash equivalent of leave salary payable in respect of the eamed leave shall be limited to 180 days. (now 300 days).

(b) The leave in respect of which such payment is made should not extend beyond his normal date of retirement on superannuation.

(c) The cash equivalent of leave salary for the entire period of such leave shall be paid in lump sum as one time settlement.

(d) The cash equivalent of leave salary payable shall include dearness allowance at the rates in force on the date of retirement. No compensatory or house rent allowance shall be included in calculation of the cash equivalent of leave salary.

(e) The leave salary for the half-pay leave component of the leave so granted will be subject to deduction on account of pension and pensionary equivalent or other retirement benefits.

(f) A Government servant who is retired on grounds of invalidation shall be entitled to cash equivalent of leave salary in respect of leave at credit on the date of such retirement, provided he applies for the same before retirement. Leave for which the lump sum benefit is allowed shall not extend beyond the normal date of retirement (on superannuation)

(g) A Government servant who is retired by Government by giving him pay and allowance in lieu of notice may have to apply for leave encashment benefit within the period for which such pay and allowances were given and shall be entitled to leave salary only for the period of leave excluding that period for which pay and allowance in lieu of notice have been allowed.

(h) A Government servant who has been permitted by Government to voluntarily retire from service while under suspension or who is retired by Goverriment in public interest while under suspension shall be paid cash equivalent of leave salary in respect of earned leave and half-pay leave standing to his credit on the date of retirement from service, provided that in the opinion of the authority competent to order reinstatement, the incumbent has been exonerated of all charges and the suspension was wholly unjustified.

3. Persons who are compulsorily retired as a measure of punishment under the Odisha Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1962, will not be governed by these orders.

4. The benefit under these orders will be admissible to Govt. servants retiring from service on or after 31,12.1980. 
(F. D. No. 2281/F., Dt. 12.01.1981)

125. Benefit of subsequent enhancement of Pay/D.A. should be allowed: In terms of paragraph 3 (b) of Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 60319/F., dated the 28th November 1977, the cash equivalent of leave salary in lieu of unutilised earned leave is payable in one lump sum as a one time settlement. A doubt has arisen whether a retired Government servant who has been paid the cash equivalent of leave salary for unutilised earned leave, is entitled to the enhanced amount of such leave salary and D.A./A.D.A. thereon which becomes due on account of subsequent revision in Pay/D.A./A.D.A. sanctioned by Government with retrospective effect.

2. As per paragraph 3 (c) of the above Office Memorandum cash payment in respect of unutilised earned leave will be equal to leave salary as admissible on that leave salary at the rates in force on the date of retirement. A Government servant who is retired from service is entitled, on the date of his retirement, to the enhanced pay, D.A. and A.D.A. sanctioned by Government, with retrospective effect if such enhancement comes into force from a date earlier to or form the date of retirement of the Govt. servant.

3. Accordingly it is clarified that leave salary in respect of unutilised earned leave calculated on such enhanced pay and enhanced D.A./A.D.A will also be admissible to retired Government servants irrespective of whether the payment at old rates has been made or not.

4. The above decision will also be applicable to the families of deceased Government servants under Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 441/F., dated the 3rd January 1978 as well as to Government servants availing the benefits of unutilised earned leave on voluntary/premature retirements as per Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 2281/F., dated the 12th January, 1981. (F. D. No. 9990/F., Dt. 12.03.1983)

126. Benefit of encashment of unutilsed EL/HPL to Government servant on voluntary retirement: In Finance Department Memorandum No. 2281/F., dated 12.1.1981, it was provided that a Government servant who is allowed to retire voluntarily or is made to retire from Government service in public interest under Rule 71 (b) of the Odisha Service Code or is retired on the ground of invalidation on the advice of Medical Authority under Rule 18 of Appendix 13 of Odisha Service Code would be entitled to cash equivalent of leave salary in respect of leave including half-pay leave at his credit on the date of such retirement subject to the condition that cash equivalent of leave salary payable in respect of Earned Leave shall be limited to 180 days. Subsequently, in Finance Department Memorandum No. 31940/F., dated 26.4.1984, it was also provided that encashment of E.L due and admissible in the above mentioned cases shall be subject to maximum of 180 days, even if this exceeds the date of normal retirement of superannuation.

2. The question of extending the benefit of encashment of unutilised leave to the Government servants who retire after rendering not less than 20 years of qualifying service under the Voluntary retirement Scheme as envisaged in Finance Department Office Memorandum No. 10516/F., dated 28.2.1978 was under consideration of Government for some time past.

3. After careful consideration, the Governor has been pleased to decide that the benefit of encashment of unutilised EL/HPL as has been allowed to Government servant who retires voluntarily under Rule 71 (a) of O.S.C. shall also be allowed to those Government servants who have retired voluntarily under the Voluntary Retirement Scheme as per Finance Department Memorandum No. 10516/F., dated 28.2.1978 on or after 31.12.1980 and that the conditions and restrictions as laid down in the Office Memorandum dated 12.7.1981 and 26.7.1984 referred to above shall apply to them. (F. D. No. 26943/F., Dt. 12.07.1985)

127. Leave encashment benefit is to be granted suo motu in case of retirement/death/voluntary retirement/ invalidation : In terms of Para, (f) of the Finance Government Office Memorandum No. 2281/F., dated 12th January 1981 a Government servant who is retired on the ground invalidation is required to apply for cash equivalent of unutilised leave salary before the date of such retirement.

2. The above provision has been reviewed in the light of the decision made by Govt. of India and after careful consideration, Govt. have been pleased to decide that the leave encashment benefit may be granted su motu by the competent authority in cases of death while in service, retirement on superannuation, voluntary retirement and retirement on ground of invalidation without waiting for any application in this regard subject to the provisions contained in F.D.O.M. No. 46545/F., dated 17.12.1991.

3. The above decision shall come into force from the date of issue of this order. The cases pending with the authority will be decided in terms of this order.

4. Necessary amendment to the Odisha Leave Rules, 1966 will be made in due course. (F. D. No. 34074/F., Dt. 04.09.1995)

128. Procedure for grant of refused leave- Clarification regarding to leave salary: According to the institution issued in the FDOM No. 14669/F., dated the 8th April, 1953 when a Govt. servant avails himself of the refused leave immediately after the date of compulsory retirement or on the expiry of an extension on service he will be deemed to have retired and become eligible for all pensionary benefits as due to him on the date of superannuation or such other later date, if any extension of service is granted form the date of expiry of such leave only.

The matter has now been reconsidered and it has been decided that when a Govt. servant is granted refused leave extending beyond the date of compulsory retirement or on the expiry on an extension of service, he shall be deemed for the purpose of pensionary benefits to have retired from service on the date of his compulsory retirement or on the expiry of the extension of service, as the case may be, and shall become eligible for all pensionary benefits from that date. The leave salary admissible in such cases during the period of refused leave will be the same as admissible in the normal course but reduced by the amount of pension and pension equivalent to other retirement benefits. The dearness ailowances admissible, if any, on leave salary in such cases would, however, be reduced by ad hoc increase of pension.

In cases, where the amount of leave salary and dearness allowance admissible is less than the pension equivalent to the retirement gratuity it should be adjusted against pension (including pension equivalent to their retirement gratuity) and ad hoc increase of pension respectively. It may be mentioned that dearness allowances during refuses leave is admissible only during the such part of leave on average pay as falls during the first four months of such leave. In other words, the officer would be entitled to the following payments by way of pension leave salary and dearness allowance.

(i) leave salary          Nil

(ii) normal pension and ad hoc increase and such pension if, any; and

(iii) the difference between the dearness allowances on the leave salary which the officer would have been normally entitled to and the ad hoc increase pension. 
(F. D. No. 14868/F., Dt. 20.04.1956)

129. Procedure for payment of leave salary in advance-Pay Commission's recommendation: The undersigned is directed to say that Government have had under consideration the recommendation in of the Pay Committee in paragraph 14 (2) of Chapter XVII of report that up to a month's leave salary may be allowed in advances to Government servants proceeding on leave.

It has been decided to accept the recommendation of the Pay Committee subject to the following conditions:

1. No advance may be granted when the leave taken is far less than a month/30 days.

2. The amount of the advance should be restricted to the net amount of leave salary for the last month or leave that is clearly admissible the Govt. servant after deductions on account of Income Tax, Provident fund, House-rent, repayment of advance, etc., so that there is no financial risk involved. The advance of leave salary will not include allowances.

3. The advance should be adjusted in full in the leave salary bill in respect of leave availed of. In case where the advances cannot be so adjusted in full, the balance will be recovered from the next payment of the pay or/and leave salary.

4. The advance may be sanctioned by the Head of Office or by any other subordinate officer to whom the power may be specially delegated both in the case of Gazetted and non-Gazetted Officers.

5. Officers who are Heads of Offices may sanction the advances to themselves.

6. In respect to Gazetted Govt. servants the advance may be granted without the audit report regarding the admissibility of leave if it can be established from the records available in the Officer that there is one month's leave at the credit of the officer concerned. The nature and the period of leave availed, of by a gazetted Government servant on the pervious occasion mentioned in the form of application for leave, which is availed with the leave sanctioning authority. The Audit Officer's previous leave report which remains. current for the next six months is also available with leave sanctioning authority, Moreover the Govt. servant earns some amount of leave during the period between the date of his last return from leave and the date on which he again proceeds on leave. The Audit Officer's report should, however, be awaited where information as above is not above is not available with the head of office and also in doubtful cases.

7. As the advance is sanctioned in lieu of leave salary there is no necessity of any separate authority from the Accountant-General for the drawl of such advance by a gazetted Government servant.

8. The amount of advance will be debited to the Head of Account to which the pay, etc. of the Government servant is debited and the adjustment of the advance will be watched through objection book by the Accounts Officer concerned.

9. Advance under these orders shall be sanctioned in whole rupees. (F. D. No. 2041/F., Dt. 07.06.1961)

130. Procedure for provisional payment of leave salary to gazetted Government servants: The undersigned is directed to say that the desirability of laying down a procedure for removing hardship caused to gazetted Government servants in the matters of drawl of leave salary consequent on the delay in the issue of sanction orders and authority slips was engaging the attention of Government for sometime past. Normally leave should be sanctioned only after obtaining the certificate of admissibility of leave from the Accountant-General and if prompt action is taken by all concerned it would ovoid delay in most of the cases. But in order to avoid hardship in individual cases where some delay is evitable, Govt., after careful consideration of the matter, have been pleases to decide as follows -

(i) Where there is reason to believe that the issue of a formal leave salary certificate will be unduly delayed, the Accountant-General may be required by the leave sanctioning authority once provisional leave salary certificate indicating distinctly the period (which in no case should exceed two months), for which anticipatory payment of leave salary is required pending receipt of a formal notification sanctioning the leave. The Accountant-General will authorise anticipatory payment of leave salary in such cases at a rate considered appropriate with reference to particulars available with him. leave on average pay/earned leave admissible or, if the officer concerned has applied for leave of half average pay/half pay leave, either by itself or in combination with leave on average pay/earned leave the total amount of both kinds of leave at credit. Such a leave report will remain current for the next six months, provided that the leave on extension of leave applied for by an officer on the second or subsequent before the expiry of six months period does not exceed the balance of leave, on average pay/earned leave or leave on half average pay/half pay leave, as the case may be, already certified by the Audit Officer. Where, however, an officer avails less amount of leave of any of the above categories than what is certified by the Accountant-General and again applied for leave of that category after a spell of duty within the period of six months but in excess of the amount in the balance according to the said certificate, a fresh report should be obtained from the Account-General, Odisha. For the purpose of determining the currency of the report, the date from which the admissibility of leave is reported by the Accountant-General should be the deciding factor.

2. The above decision shall not apply to cases of grant of leave preparatory to retirement and refused leave which should always be sanctioned on receipt of admissibility report from the A.G., Odisha.

3. The decision contained in Clause (i) of paragraph 1 will remaining force up to the 4th June, 1962. (F. D. No. 39301/F., Dt. 16.11.1961)

131. Procedure for disbursement of leave salary in advance to Govt. servants who availed of leave on reversion from foreign service: The undersigned is directed to invite a reference to this Department Office Memorandum No. 20513/F., dated 7th June, 1961 regarding payment of leave salary in advance and to state that a question has been raised as to how and by whom the advance of leave salary shall be paid in respect of a Govt. servant on foreign service.

2. It has been decided that the advance of leave salary in respect of Govt. servants who avail of leave during or on reversion from foreign service shall be paid by the foreign employer without any specific authority/ orders from the Accounts Officer/competent authority for the drawal of the advance.

3. The payment of advance to Government servants on foreign service in India will be subject to the observance of the following procedure -

(i) As soon as the foreign employer pays the advances, he should place demand of the A.G./Head of Office responsible for authorising/ drawing leave salary duly supported by the case receipt obtained from the Officer.

(ii) The Accountant-General/Head of Office should check the correctness of the amount paid as advance and refund the amount of the advance to the foreign employer by means of a bank draft. It is found that the advance already paid by the foreign employer is more than the correct amount admissible under rules, the Accountant-General/Head of Office should reimburse only the correct amount and request the foreign employer to recover the balance from Govt. servant directly.

(iii) The amount of bank draft should be classified under the final head to which the leave salary is debitable.

(iv) Suitable entries should also be made by Accountant-General in his objection book and the Audit Register for watching the adjustment of the advance in usual course. Likewise the Head of Office should keep appropriate note in his records to watch the adjustment of the advance from the final leave salary.

(v) The foreign employer should indicate in the last Pay Certificate the outstanding advances so that the recovery of the same is not lost sight of by the Accountant-General/Head of Office. (F. D. No. 35922/F., Dt. 11.09.1962)

LEAVE CALCULATION FORMULA

Earned Leave

Shri 'C' joined service on 19.1.2017. He availed E.L. as follows :-

(i) 18 days from 29.6.2017 to 16.7.2017

(ii) 8 days from 27.12.2017 to 13.1.2018 Calculation of E.L. at Credit on 1.7.2018)

Notes: i. E.L. at credit on 29.6.2017 was 13 days only, yet E.L. could be for 18 days from 29.6.2017 to 16.7.2017 taking into account advance credit of 15 days to be given on 1.7.2017.

ii. Likewise E.L. at credit on 27.12.2017 was 10 days only. Yet E.L. for 18 days from 27.12.2017 to 13.1.2018 could be sanctioned taking into account advance credit of 15 days to be given on 1.1.2018.

iii. Though E.L. was granted from 29.6.2017 to 16.6.2017 in one spell and likewise from 27.12.2017 to 13.1.2018 in a spell in both the cases posting in Leave Account should be made separately (i) from 29.6.2017 to 30.6.2017 and 1.7.2017 to 16.6.2017 and likewise (ii) from 27.12.2017 to 31.12.2017 and 1.1.2018 to 13.1.2018.

Unavailed joining time credited to Leave Account as E.L.

1. Admissible if an employee on transfer joins the new post without availing himself of the full joining time to which he is entitled.

2. The difference between the eligible joining time is limited to 10 days and the number of days actually availed will be credited to his E.L account.

3. The amount so credited plus the existing credit should not exceed 300 days.

Balance of E.L as on 31.12.2017          100 days

Availed joining time 5 days against the entitlement of 10 days for proceeding alone to the new station in the month of March, 2018.

Note: The credit of unavailed joining time to E.L. account will be adjusted subject to the maximum of 10 days if one of the two prescribed conditions are fulfilled, viz.,

(i) if the official is specifically ordered to join duty immediately by curtailing the joining time, on

(ii) if he proceeds alone to the new place and takes his family thereafter within 6 months.

(REHABILITATION ASSISTANCE) RULES - 2020

GAD-SC-RAS-0029-2014-5651/Gen., Dt. 17.02.2020

In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to article 309 of the Constitution of India and in supersession of the Odisha Civil Service (Rehabilitation Assistance) Rules, 1990, the Governor of Odisha is pleased to make the following rules to regulate recruitment to the Group-D Posts as a measure of rehabilitation assistance, namely :-

1. Short Title and Commencement: (1) These rules may be called the Odisha Civil Services (Rehabilitation Assistance) Rules, 2020.

(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Odisha Gazette.

2. Definitions : (1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires -

(a) "Appointing Authority" means the appointing authority of the deceased Government servant who held the substantive post at the time of his death;

(b) "deserving case" means where the applicant is awarded at least 60 points in the evaluation process out of the maximum 100 points finally allotted by the Appointing Authority under rule 6;

(c) "compassionate appointment" means appointment of any family member of the deceased Government servant under the Rehabilitation Assistance;

(d) "family members" means and include the following members -

(i) Spouse of the deceased Government servant.

(ii) Sons or step sons or sons legally adopted through a registered deed executed before the death of the Government servant.

(iii) Un-married daughters and Un-married step daughters.

(iv) Widowed daughters or daughters-in-law residing permanently with the family of the deceased Government employee.

(v) Legally divorced daughter.

(e) "Government" means the Government of Odisha;

(f) "Form" means form appended to these rules;

(g) "Medical Board" means Medical Board constituted under the Chairmanship of the Chief District Medical Officer and two other senior Government doctors and an Administrative Officer as nominated by the District Collector of the concerned district of permanent residence of the deceased Government employee;

(h) "medically unfit" means absolutely not capable of performing any sort of Government job as per report of the Medical Board;

(i) "Rehabilitation Assistance" means the assistance provided under these rules to a member of the family of the Government servant who died while in service; and

(0) "Year" means the calendar year.

3. Compassionate appointment: (1) Subject to provisions contained in these rules, in deserving cases, one family member of the deceased Government Servant shall be appointed on compassionate ground to Group-D base level post only by the appointing authority of that deceased Government servant which shall not be claimed as a matter of right.

(2) Appointment on compassionate ground shall be made without following the due recruitment procedure subject to satisfaction of the educational qualification prescribed for the post:

Provided that the widow of the deceased Government Servant, where appointed on compassionate ground, is not required to satisfy the educational qualification prescribed for the said post if the appointing authority is satisfied that the duties attached to the post can be satisfactorily performed without having the requisite educational qualification:

Provided further that up to fifty per centum (50%) of the sanctioned strength shall be filled up by the applicants under the Rehabilitation Assistance subject to availability of vacancies as on the first day of January of the year in which the appointment is considered. Principles of Reservation will be ensured against the total sanctioned strength of base level Group D post.

4. Applicability: Compassionate appointment to any base level Group-D post, under these rules, shall ordinarily be available to the spouse of the deceased Govt. employee: Provided that in case the spouse is more than 50 years of age as on the date of death of the deceased Govemment employee and not willing to serve by giving written declaration in this respect or in case the spouse is found to be medically unfit for the job as per the report of the Medical Board, the spouse may nominate anyone of the eligible family members of the deceased Government employee for compassionate appointment:

Provided further that in case the spouse of the deceased Government employee is not alive, all other family members of the deceased Government employee may nominate anyone amongst them for compassionate appointment under these rules.

5. Authority competent to make compassionate appointments: The authority competent to make substantive appointment to the post of an office identified for appointment of the applicant, shall be the competent authority to make appointment under these rules.

6. Mode of Appointments: (1) Application for appointment under these rules shall be submitted by the eligible family member of the deceased Government employee, in Form A of these rules along with the following documents, to the Appointing Authority, namely:

(a) 'Legal Heir' certificate issued by the Tahasildar concerned;

(b) 'Medically Unfit' certificate issued by the Medical Board of the district of permanent residence of the deceased Government employee, in Form B of these rules, in case the spouse of the deceased Government employee is medically unfit for appointment under these rules;

(c) Nomination by the spouse or by other family members (where the spouse is not alive) of the deceased Government employee, in Form C of these rules nominating the applicant for compassionate appointment under these rules, if applicable;

(2) On receipt of the application, the Appointing Authority shall verify the details furnished by the applicant (except information contained against Sl. No. 6 and 8 of the application form) and determine the eligibility of the applicant by allotting points in the Evaluation Sheet given in Form D to these rules, as given below :-

(a) If the total points allotted to the applicant in Part - 1 of the evaluation sheet is 60 or more, the applicant shall automatically be eligible for appointment under these rules and in such case, the Part II of the evaluation sheet need not be filled up or assessed.

(b) If the total points allotted to the applicant in Part - I of the evaluation sheet is 44 or less, the applicant shall automatically be ineligible for appointment under these rules and in such case, the Part - II of the evaluation sheet need not be filled up or assessed.

(c) If the total point allotted to the applicant in Part-I of the evaluation sheet is between 44 and 60 (i.e. 45 to 59), then the Appointing Authority shall allot points provisionally in Part II of the evaluation sheet on the basis of the details furnished by the applicant in the application form and if the sum total of points thus allotted to the applicant in Part-I and Part-II of the evaluation sheet remains below 60, the applicant shall be ineligible for appointment under these rules.

(d) If the total point allotted to the applicant in Part I of the evaluation sheet is between 44 and 60 (i.e. 45 to 59) and the sum total of points allotted to the applicant in Part I and Part II of the evaluation sheet, as mentioned in Para (c), becomes 60 or more, then the Appointing Authority shall forward a copy of the application to the Collector of the district where the deceased Government employee had his permanent residence and seek a report from the Collector in the Form E to these rules and as per the application, if the applicant or any of his or her family members owns immovable property, jointly or individually, in a district other than the district of permanent residence of the deceased Government employee, the Appointing Authority shall also seek a report from the Collector of the other district(s) concerned the Form F of these rules.

(e) On receipt of the report(s) from the district Collector(s) as stated above, the Appointing Authority shall finally allot points to the applicant in Part II of the evaluation sheet on the basis of the report(s) of the Collector(s) and if the sum total of the points finally allotted to the applicant in Part I and Part II of the evaluation sheet becomes 60 or more, the applicant shall be eligible for appointment under these rules.

(3) In the event the applicant meets the standard as per the criteria outlined under rule 6 (2), the Appointing Authority shall appoint the applicant in a suitable available base level Group 'D' vacant post under his control, but if a vacancy does not exist under his administrative control, the Appointing Authority shall forward the application to the Head of the Department with request for his suitable appointment against such vacant posts available in his control and the Head of the Department shall locate vacancies in his own office or other offices under his administrative control and direct Head of the Office where there is such vacant posts to appoint the applicant, and also if no vacancy is immediately available, the application shall be considered for the subsequent vacancy arising In the offices of Heads of Departments and the Head of the Department shall appoint the candidate in the office or in the offices subordinate thereto.

(4) In the case of the Departments of Government in the Secretariat or their attached offices, the Appointing Authority, subject to the conditions stipulated in the proviso to rule 4 shall follow the procedure as specified hereunder, namely :-

(a) The concerned Deptt. shall appoint the candidate against any base level Group-D vacant post available under its control in the Deptt.

(b) In case of non-availability of suitable post, the Department shall direct the Heads of Departments to appoint the candidate against any suitable base level Group-D post under their administrative control.

(5) If the applicant does not join the compassionate appointment offered, he or she shall forfeit his or her claim under these rules for all times to come and no choice will be offered to the applicant to exercise an option to select or reject any compassionate appointment.

(6) While considering the pending applications in any office, the concerned Competent Authority will consider all complete and eligible applications in order of date of death of the deceased employees.

(7) The economic distress condition shall be evaluated, as per the points awarded In the evaluation sheet contained in Form D, on the date of death of Government employee.

(8) The process of evaluation of application and offering compassionate appointment to the eligible applicant shall be completed within a period of one year from the date of receipt of application complete in all respects.

(9) All pending cases as on the date of publication of these rules in the Odisha Gazette shall be dealt in accordance with the provision of these rules.

(10) In all pending cases, the Appointing Authority shall collect the additional information on the present distress condition from the applicant within six months from the date of publication of these rules in the Odisha Gazettee and evaluate the applications along with fresh applications received during that period.

7. Conditions of Services: (1) Appointment under these rules shall be made only against the posts required to be filled up by direct recruitment.

(2) Family of a Government servant who dies while on re-employment after period of retirement or during the period of extended service period shall not be eligible for any further benefit under these rules.

(3) Application for appointment under these rules shall be considered, if it is received within one year from the date of death of the Govt. servant:

Provided that if the applicant fails to apply within the prescribed period of one year from the date of death of the deceased Government employee, he or she has to furnish sufficient justification along with supporting documents for such delay while submitting the application form and in all such cases, the Appointing Authority shall examine the case with reference to the reasons advanced and documents furnished and if he is satisfied that delay is justified, he shall evaluate the application as specified under sub-rule (2) of rule 6 of these rules and shall recommend the case for condonation of delay to the concerned Administrative Department through proper channel.

(4) If the application, duly forwarded, and received through proper channel for condonation of delay, the same may be considered by the Government in the concerned Administrative Department, if delay has been justified properly.

(5) The application submitted after two years of death of deceased Government employee shall not be entertained by the Appointing Authority.

(6) Before issue of appointment order, the Appointing Authority shall ensure the production of the following documents :-

(a) Medical Certificate of Health.

(b) Undertaking to the effect that he shall maintain the family members of the deceased Government servant excepting the member who is self-sufficient as an earner and who is otherwise separate from the family after partition through a registered deed or after marriage as on the death of the deceased Government servant.

8. Termination of Service: (1) Suppression of correct information or furnishing of false information in the application shall render the applicant liable for rernoval from service in addition to other legal action to which he may be liable under the existing laws and this will also debar other members of his family from getting appointment under these rules.

(2) If any person after execution of an undertaking under clause (b) of rule 7 violates the terms as specified therein, the same would amount to gross misconduct for imposition of major penalty by the Appointing Authority under the C.C.A. Rules, 1962.

9. Seniority: Seniority of persons, appointed under these rules, shall be fixed below the persons recruited to the posts in a particular Department or Office in that year.

10. Interpretation: If any question arises relating to the interpretation of any provision of these rules, it shall be referred to the Government in the General Administration and Public Grievance Department for decision.

By order of the Governor 
Principal Secretary to the Government

FORM 'A'

[See rule 6 (1)]

FORM OF APPLICATION FOR APPOINTMENT UNDER THE ODISHA CIVIL SERVICE REHABILITATION ASSISTANCE RULES

(TO BE SUBMITTED IN DUPLICATE BY THE APPLICANT)

PART-1

1. Name of the deceased Government Servant:

2. Designation and Office or Department of the Government Servant (at the time of death):

3. Employment or Service status, whether permanent or temporary:

4. Total length of Service rendered:

5. Date of death (An attested copy of the death certificate issued by the Health & Family Welfare Department to be enclosed):

6. Details of each of the family members:

7. Is any of the members listed under item 6 has been given compassionate appointment under the Odisha Civil Service (Rehabilitation Assistance) Rules? If yes, particulars of such appointment shall be given :

8. Details of immovable property, land and house if any, in the name of deceased Government Servant and members of family:

9. Pension, Family Pension and T.I. etc.

PART - II

1. Name of the applicant for appointment with AADHAAR Card

Number:

2. Gender:

3. His/Her relationship with the deceased Government Servant:

4. Date of Birth:

5. Particulars of educational qualification, if any (certificate to be attached):

6. Whether belongs to any of the following categories (If yes, certificates to be attached):

(a) SC or ST or SEBC

(b) Ex-Serviceman

(c) Person with Disability

(d) Sports person

I, Shri/Smt/Kumari Son/Daughter/

Wife of hereby declare that the information furnished above is true to my best of my knowledge and belief. If, on a future date, any of the information mentioned herein is found to be false and incorrect, my services shall be liable for termination unilaterally without any notice.

Date: Name and Signature of the Applicant

Mandatory certificates to be attached

1. Death certificate of the deceased Government Servant/Employee.

2. Legal Heir Certificate issued by the Tahasildar.

3. Age proof of the spouse of the deceased, if the spouse is above 50 years of age.

4. Death Certificate of the spouse of the deceased, if the spouse is already dead.

5. Medical unfit certificate in Form 'B' (if applicable).

6. Nomination in favour of the applicant in Form 'C' (if applicable).

7. AADHAR Card of the applicant.

8. Registered Deed of adoption, if the applicant is the adopted son of the deceased.

9. Death certificate of husband, if the applicant is the widowed daughter or daughter-in-law of the deceased.

FORM 'B'

[See rule 6 (1)(b) ]

MEDICAL CERTIFICATE

(As per format prescribed by the Government of Odisha in Health & Family Welfare Department from time to time)

FORM 'C'

[See rule 6 (1)(c)]

NOMINATION

Nomination by the spouse of the Deceased Government Employee

I, Shri/Smt............... wife/husband of............... Late...............being aged more than 50 years of age/being medically unfit for taking up any job (strike out whichever is not applicable), do hereby nominate Shri/Smt/Kumari who is my son/un-married daughter/widowed daughter/widowed daughter- in-law (strike out which one is not applicable), for compassionate appointment under these rules on my behalf.

Date:

Place:

Signature of the spouse of the deceased employee

Nomination by the other family members of the Deceased Govt. Employee in case the spouse of the deceased is not alive

We, all the surviving family members of the deceased Government employee Late ...............as listed below, do hereby nominate Shri/Smt./Kumari ..............., who is the son/un- married daughter/widowed daughter/widowed daughter-in-law (strike out which one is not applicable) of the deceased Government employee, for compassionate appointment under these rules on our behalf.

FORM 'D'

[See rule 6(2)]

EVALUATION SHEET TO CONSIDER APPOINTMENT UNDER REHABILITATION ASSISTANCE

Name of the deceased Government employee :-

Name of the applicant for Rehabilitation Assistance:-

Relationship of the applicant with the deceased employee :-

PART-I

1. Length of left over service period of the deceased employee :

Part- 1 Maximum points: 85

Part -1 Total points awarded to the applicants :-

(Please tick one of the following boxes as applicable)

Since the applicant has scored 60 or more points in Part-I, he/she becomes eligible for appointment under Rehabilitation Assistance. Further evaluation in Part-ll is not required.

Since the applicant has scored 44 or less points in Part-I, he/she becomes ineligible for appointment under Rehabilitation Assistance. Further evaluation in Part-II is not required.

Since the applicant has scored between 44 & 60 (i.e. 45 to 59) points in Part-1, further evaluation in Part-II is required.

Name and Signature of the Appointing Authority

PART - II

VII. Monthly income of earning member (s) of the family, if any, and income from other sources excluding family pension:

N.B.: Income from all sources, private, public, agriculture or business by the family members, who have been identified as legal heirs of the deceased govemment employee, to be taken into account.

VIII. Immovable property (land and house) (Latest market value in Rupees)

Total of Part-I & Part-II =

(Please tick one of the following boxes as applicable)

Points in Part-Il are allotted as per the details given by the applicants in his or her applications. Since the total of Part-I & Part-Il points becomes 59 or less, the applicant is not eligible for appointment under the Rehabilitation Assistance. Report from the District Collector in Form 'E' and 'F' is not required.

Points in Part-ll are allotted as per Collector's report in Form 'E' and 'F'. Since the total of Part-I and Part-II points becomes 59 or less, the applicant is not eligible for appointment under the Rehabilitation Assistance.

Points in Part-II are allotted as per Collector's report in Form 'E' and 'F'. Since the total of Part-1 and Part-Il points becomes 60 or more, the applicant is eligible for appointment under the Rehabilitation Assistance.

Name and Signature of the Appointing Authority

10 FORM 'E' ODELIC(See rule - 6(2) (d))

REPORT OF THE DISTRICT COLLECTOR

(District of permanent Residence of the deceased) ...............District, Odisha

1. Name of the Deceased Government Employee :-

2. Name of the Applicant for Rehabilitation Assistance :-

3. Relationship of the Applicant with the Deceased :-

4. Income and Status of the Deceased family Members :-

5. Present Market Value of Immovable Property Owned by Deceased's Family Members.

FORM 'F'

(See rule-6(2) (d)]

REPORT OF THE DISTRICT COLLECTOR

(District other than the District of permanent Residence of the deceased) ...............District, Odisha

1. Name of the Deceased Government Employee :-

2. Name of the Applicant for Rehabilitation Assistance :-

3. Relationship of the Applicant with the Deceased :-

4. Present Market Value of Immovable property owned by the deceased's family members, whether mentioned or not mentioned in the Rehabilitation Assistance Application, must be reported.

CASE LAWS

ORISSA CIVIL SERVICE

(REHABILITATION ASSISTANCE) RULES, 1990

Rule 5 Compassionate appointment due to premature death of petitioner's father while in employment -Though Board of Secondary Education adopted OCA (RA) Rules, 1990 for Class-IV employees but has passed a resolution in the case of Class-III employees, seeking compassionate appointment to appear in a test to assess their suitability for quality service Held, the resolution to conduct the availability of the legal-heirs of the deceased employee against Class-III post is contrary and gross violation of Rule-5 of the statutory rules and cannot be sustained in the eye of law as the Rules 1990 has been framed under Article 309 of the Constitution and the benefits prescribed therein cannot be whittled down by a resolution - Intimation to the petitioner to appear a test for appointment against Class-III post despite petitioner's name enlisted for appointment as per direction of the Government is accordingly quashed. Sabyasachi Nayak v. Secretary, Board of Secondary Education, Odisha & Ors.: 2021 (II) OLR (NOC) 178.

Rule 5 In deserving cases - Explained - The factual matrix of the case is that petitioner applied for compassionate appointment as her husband died while working as junior clerk - Appointment order was issued on 17.11.2004 in favour of petitioner as junior diarist - One Bhagawan Mohanty filed O.A. before the Orissa Administrative Tribunal, Bhubaneswar claiming the post as promotional and being the senior most in Class-IV post should be given him promotion as junior diarist, in which the petitioner was appointed Learned Tribunal disposed of the O.A. with direction to the State authority to consider the grievance for the promotion to the rank of junior diarist for a period of two months Due to the order of the Tribunal the joining report of petitioner was not accepted challenging which the petitioner filed O.A. at Cuttack which was transferred to this Court due to abolition of the said Tribunal - Held, as the representation of said Bhagwan Mohanty was rejected vide order dated 14.03.2005 as the said post has been exhausted and admittedly the petitioner was allowed to join in service w.e.f. 30.07.2005 and her joining should be notionally treated w.e.f. 23.11.2004 to entitle her to get all consequential benefits in accordance with law.: Mamata Pati v. State of Odisha &: Ors.: 2021 (II) OLR (NOC) 275.

Rule 5 read with Rules 2(b) and 3 Rejection of rehabilitation application by the petitioner (son) on the ground of availability of spouse and no medical unfitness certificate in respect of the spouse has been recommended by the competent authority Rules, 1990 never restricts rehabilitation assistance employment to the members of family - Impugned order violates the mandates of OCS (RA) Rules, 1990 Impugned order of rejection set aside - Directions issued - Writ petition allowed.: Prakash Chandra Nayak v. State of Odisha & Ors.: 2021 (I) OLR 756: 2021 Lab I.C. 3623 (Ori).

Claim of petitioner for Compassionate appointment rejected - Writ - Six category of persons have been enumerated in family members - If the family is in distressed condition, any member of the family can make an application, provided the conditions mentioned in Rule-2A are satisfied - Application was rejected solely on the ground that the petitioner is the third legal heir - It is too late in the day to contend that the application was not made within one year from the death of the employee as per 9 (6) of the Rules, 1990- Order of rejection cannot be justified by taking another ground Matter remitted back to opposite party No. 1 to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment under the Rules, 1990: Biswaranjan Barik v. State of Orissa & Ors. :2018 (II) OLR 795. 

Direction of Tribunal to provide appointment to O.P. No. 1 on compassionate ground - Writ - At the time of death of O.P. No. 1's father, he was minor - O.P. No. 1 made an application for getting appointment on compassionate ground after lapse of 14 years from the date of death of his father Appointment on compassionate ground is to be given immediately for the simple reason that the bereaved family requires monetary help immediately due to the sudden demise of the bread, earner arid if during the relevant time it has not been provided and the family has survived, then there is no purpose of providing appointment on compassionate ground by snatching a right of the legitimate candidate - Held; learned Tribunal has passed the impugned order contrary to the settled proposition of law - Impugned order set aside. State of Orissa & Ors. V. Rabindranath Samal & Anr.: 2017 (1) OLR 357: 2017 (1) LLJ 536 Ori.

Father of the applicant was appointed as a 'Mali' - He died in harness Widow made a representation to engage her 2nd son The application being not considered O.A. filed which was dismissed - Writ - First preference is to be given to wife/husband of the deceased employee then son and unmarried daughter - No where it was stated that in case a family member in order of preference in the hierarchy is unfit and a Medical Certificate furnished to that effect, claim shall not be considered for engagement of the other eligible members in case of distress condition of the family Finding given by the Tribunal in the impugned order that she is not prepared to accept Group 'D' post and offered it to her son in ignoring the material on records is not sustainable Appointment letter was issued in favour of widow of the deceased employee in the year, 2016 She was not fit to discharge the duties which was not disputed by the parties - Impugned order is, an error apparent on the face of record - Impugned order set aside - Direction to O.P. No. 2 to issue appointment order in favour of the petitioner: Ajit Kumar Barik v. State of Orissa & Ors.: 2018 (II) OLR 10.

Orissa Education, Act, 1969 Sec. 3 (b) Application, of the petitioner for appointment rejected by Government - Writ - Application of the petitioner was rejected on jejune grounds - Impugned order quashed - Matter remitted back for reconsideration in accordance with law. Suchitra Bal v. State of Odisha & Ors.: 2018 (II) OLR 641.

Petitioner appointed on 7.7.2000 and immediately after 22 days, the order of cancellation of his appointment has been passed Writ - Father of the petitioner died on 5.5.1994 and at that time, the petitioner was at the age of 14 years and he was minor - He immediately on attaining the age of majority has made application to get appointment on compassionate ground on 27.4.1997 - Evident from the date of death and the date of application, the same is within the time as provided under the provision of Rule 9 (7) Decision taken by the Corporation will not come in the way and the petitioner cannot be made to suffer due to that decision since the delay has been caused by the Corporation Order quashed Matter remitted back with direction. Ashok Kumar Sen v. OLIC & Ors.: 2018 (1) OLR 461.

Whether an employee is engaged for long nine years without being disrupted being holder of civil post, his wife has got legitimate fight to claim to step into the shoes of her late Husband When the husband of the petitioner was holder of the civil post receiving the remuneration, he was holder of a civil post under Art. 310 read with 311 of the Constitution of India No reason to disqualify the petitioner when her husband was holding a civil post - Tribunal fell in error by not understanding the tactual aspect and illegally rejected, the claim of the petitioner - Observation of the Tribunal being dehors to principles of law is liable to be set aside - Impugned order quashed - Directions issued: Susama Rath v. State of Odisha & others: 2016 (1) OLR 1127: 122 (2016) CLT 754.

Rule 2 (b) Application for appointment under the Rehabilitation Assistance Scheme rejected - Writ - Husband having been died, his wife to be given preference for compassionate appointment - Since she relinquished her claim because of her illness, recourse should have been taken by the authority to Clause (ii) of Sub-clause (b) of Rule 2 i.e. second preference category to which the petitioner, who is the son of the deceased and his case should have been considered for such appointment - Son is the second priority for consideration of compassionate appointment - If the widow has relinquished her claim, the case of the petitioner has to be taken into consideration - As such the authority has accepted the request and required certain documents in that regard - Petitioner filed the required documents- At a belated stage, the authority could not have rejected the application of the petitioner for compassionate appointment stating that it is hit by Rule 2 (b) of the Rules, 1990 Order quashed Matter remitted back to the authority concerned for reconsideration of the case: Bibhuti Bhusan Patnaik v. State of Odisha & Ors.: 2018 (Supp. II) OLR 918.

Rule 11 Compassionate appointment due to premature death of petitioner's father while in employment Compassionate appointment is an exception to the general rule that appointment to public service should be on merits and through open invitation - In such cases, the appointment is given to a member of the family of the deceased employee by accommodating him in a suitable vacancy Compassionate must be in consonance with the constitutional scheme of equality enshrined in Arts. 14 and 16 of Constitution of India Non-extension of benefit to the petitioner was in gross violation of the mandate of law, and the conditions imposed that unless the vacancy was available in the school where the father of the petitioner was rendering service, the benefit could not be extended is absolutely misconceived restriction imposed by the authority concerned, which cannot sustain in the eye of law Directions issued.: Dipti Ranjan Mishra v. State of Orissa & Ors.: 2017 (Supp. I)

OLR 674: 2017 Lab I.C. 2884 (Ori.).